O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine assembled from its employment, and I have finished it by its expositions and declarations. And it occurred to me that I would complete this treatise with this surgeon, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery
And because the work of the hands is difficult in our region and is strange to all, if the science is lost and forgotten, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have followed And from this has come the error and the idleness, and the understanding is closed and the science is disordered.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation. Or it seems to me that I shall make it live together the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall come together the forms of the cautery instruments and other implements of this work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Or it seems to me that I shall give life to this treatise in its entirety according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I shall join together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of this work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary And it befits him who meddleth in this work to be well acquainted with the science of anatomy, as Galen saith, so that he can judge of the members, and the forms and the joints and the separations of things, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and limbs and the number of bones, and the movement of the veins and the rest.
And thus Ipocras says that we must not be careless with the matter, but that with the work it is enough. and myself in the art of making it.
As we have said in the beginning of this book, whoever is not familiar with the things that are to be said should keep silent and not speak carelessly, lest he cause harm to himself or others.
Because I have often seen more of these things which intertwine with this science and if they abandon both science and sense and experiment.
For I have seen fools who have coped with scrofula or a woman's neck, and have coped the arteries of the neck; because so much blood has flowed out that the woman has died between her hands.
And I have seen another fool who has treated a stone from a boil, and the stone was great; If he pulls out a piece of the bladder with it, and was sick for three days.
And thus I have already been called to treat, and I saw the condition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and I knew that if it were pulled out, he would surely die.
And thus I heard of another madman from our land who had a broken leg, and with the wound festered.</start_of_turn>
And the physicians learned that the fracture on the wound was as thick as stars, and did not allow the wound to bleed, and left it until the end.</start_of_turn
And they commanded that it should not be pulled out again.</start_of_turn>
And so it happened that the limb was completely limp and the bone was shattered and came to an end.</start_of_turn
I went to call for him, and I hurried to unbind the limb.</start_of_turn And when I saw it dislocated, it was without pain and showed no sign of suffering.
But every way the corruption had already been confirmed or the limb was already unsound, and I could not heal it;
and it continued to slip from the limb until the limb was completely lost
And thus another malady which engulfs the abdomen and encloses the veins, and then inflates because of the malice of its lord.
For cancer, when it is caused by melancholy humor, does not suffice to touch it with iron except in cases where it can remove everything that is corrupted.
Therefore, very wise men, you must know that the hand is divided into two sections namely, the wrist or if there is danger in several positions.
And I will show in each chapter what is doubtful and dangerous
for it is necessary that you take precautions lest fools should speak badly of you.
If you grasp your arms firmly and undertake your patients gently and firmly, and use the right way, then by the grace of God your journey will be peaceful and your wounds will be healed.
and leave the sick feeling relaxed with peace.
and keep your arms from that which makes you doubt, and trust in your strength so that you can go from this world to the next in peace
Praise God in abundance for his wonders Do not take my word for it that any illness is incurable, for I am not a madman
I have devised this treatment in three chapters.
The first chapters are about cautery with fire and cold cautery of medicine, and this chapter orders from the head down to the feet;
And of the forms of the instruments, and of the caulking materials, and of everything that is necessary for the work.
And of the chapters following, there is teaching of cutting and perforating, and of blisters and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and of similar things; or where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And this chapter orders and describes the forms of the instruments
The next chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and of similar things
And it is ordered to take the chief until the piece, and to describe the forms of the instruments
As we have remembered from our work, it is necessary to say what is the quality of the aid and the danger of great complexion.
I say that the qualities of the aid, and inexperience, are the longest word and subtle science and the greatest response;
And concerning this, they spoke of many wounds, and they agreed on that.
And I am stifled by their words, for I fear the length of the matter.
I say that cautery is of universal help for all complexions, for there are two complexions: namely the complexion is hot and dry, or the complexion is cold and dry
In the hot and dry complexion, there is no doubt and they say that cautery is of great help; and the other say the opposite that cautery is of no use for diseases that come from heat and moisture. For the nature of fire is hot, and it must not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor by moisture
And thus it is said that the fire cautery brings great aid to hot and dry diseases that arise in the bodies of houses. For when you compare the body and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.</start_of_turn
And I agree to this word. For I have never found it to be otherwise by experience.</start_of_turn>
And thus it is said that no one should interfere with fire except him who has experienced it, and who knows by long experience the physician of cauteries, and the variety of complexions of houses, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the exits and the space of their pains.
for other complexions we do not have our own fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all of them yield and agree to the cautery.</start_of_turn>
And know this, children, that fire cautery is better than any secret medicine or burning salve.
For fire is simple, and brings no harm to any member other than the one being treated.
The warming medicines come from one member to another by exchange, and cause the disease of the member to find relief through healing. and by chance it brings the patient the disease.
Fire, because of its height and for the goodness of its substance, does not do this without excess.</start_of_turn>
And this I have learned through experience and by the length of my service and by the study I have made of the art, and it is confirmed by the truth of things.
And for this reason I apologize for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to hide the secret which is revealed or the fire, and the quality of the work, as it demonstrates the healing of diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates. or it confirms what you think.
Know then, son, when it comes to making cauteries, they must be done at a suitable tension and with caution.</start_of_turn>
And I say that cautery is useful in all cases, for the harmful effects arising from it are driven away by the aid of the cautery. and even if the cautery is for necessary pains that are urgent and cannot await the time when the greater harm does not arise in the limb.
And never think, dear son, if like fools they do make it. for the disease which is cured by cautery has no return. he says it like that.
he says it like that. but it is not so if they cure; for cautery is only a medicine which changes the complexion and dries up humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its violence, and for the excellence of its work and its power.</start_of_turn>
and it is known that no disease comes once according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its power.</start_of_turn
and there are put together in him the superabundance of food and other things, if it is not cautery administered in place or if there is little superabundance and moisture, as with dense cautery for pain, and other things, and part of the pain does not return again.</start_of_turn But this is often the case.
And many people do not understand me because the cautery is called behind medicine, and it is seen;
but they do not believe me that the cautery is better than medicine, although their understanding is false; for indeed, when we administer remedies for various diseases and they do not help, we then administer the cautery, and it is better.
Therefore, although cautery is behind medicine, it does not agree with the intentions of the foolish masses.
The ancient people said that the gold cautery is wiser than the iron, and they do not say that the fire is strong except for the quality of the gold and for the fineness of its substance;
and they say that the smell of the cautery does not cause any harm, but this is not true as I have proven, and I have found that it is seen in many sick people
And gold cautery is more useful than iron, as they say. And whenever you burn with an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is red or cold;
and if you burn it too much; it will be burnt to ashes.</start_of_turn> and thus there is enough hindrance.</start_of_turn>
Or you have commanded this chapter from the head down to the feet, because for this reason the way is easier to find.</start_of_turn>
These olive cauteries are useful for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two things that cause it: a disease called "soda," and many humors that descend from the head downwards, causing swelling in the eyes, ears, and throat, and for many dreams and pain in the head and neck, and even for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.</start_of_turn>
The form of this cautery is that the patient is purged by a medicinal solution modifying the head III or IIII, according to what the virtue and the habit of the patient and the nature of the disease allow; and then you must repeat the head of the patient.</start_of_turn
And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands over his knees.
Then put the root of your thumb on the root of his elbow between his two thumbs. and there you will find your two middle fingers, if it bleeds from the base then cover the cautery which is called "olive" in this fashion: And take out the mark of ink and make it descend and extract your hand a little and then rest it Then hold your hand firmly and support the limb if you see the bone slightly protruding; And if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you
After taking a purgative, I put the patient in awe and bind firmly with cotton, and take out the limb, and leave it out for three days.
After putting on moist wool compresses in the wound and leave them on until the swelling is stiff Then cure the wound of the swelling which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed
And the old people say, the more time passes over the wound, the more it purges. Therefore it helps the pus to flow out.
And they say none of these that we must leave the cautery on for so long that any part of the bone is scorched, and then we must renew what is scorched from the bone, and it must be cured.</start_of_turn>
And others say it must be cauterized while leaving it on, and press so strongly that if it breaks from bone to bone, I saw that women put their braids in their hair for this reason that the humors come out with the pus.</start_of_turn>
And one must leave the wound open and long exposed; Afterwards, one must care for it and bandage it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be very useful in all cases, unless in certain homes or where there is fear of infection;
I believe I must leave it alone
because the head of the shoulder is weakened by continuous moisture, as we have seen in other limbs.
and in general when the head of the shoulder is feeble by nature, the first sign of cautery is more salve and painful for me, and for this reason I often abstain from it.
When in all these circumstances there is chronic pain lasting a long time, one must use for the patient unguents and pills called "cochie", and vomiting of the head and oil and plasters And if you do the cautery as we have said before, it is of no avail. Take care that if the patient’s condition is very serious and not too cold; Then do the cautery as we have mentioned above.</start_of_turn> Afterwards do the cautery on the skin of the shoulder down to the bone, as we have said before, and do the cautery at the place which is called “vasselz”. And it is done in such a way that one puts sponges on it.</start_of_turn and keep your hand still so that you do not see blood until the bone is reached.</start_of_turn The patient experiences much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later.
It is necessary that the horn cautery be finer than that used for the moisture of the head, and this is the form:
Dou cautere dou chief When there is sudden pain in a part of the head, and it extends to the marrow, and the head of the shoulder is dislocated, and other treatments have been performed as I have mentioned in the division of diseases, and all of this has not helped Therefore, you must make cautery in two ways, that is to say with medicine and with fire.
The medicinal cautery is if you take a dose of alum, and loosen the bark and cover it as much as you can with the two fingers, and then press the temple where the pain is so that you can restore the dose of alum from the skin
And when it is reset, if you bind it firmly and restrain it well, and leave it for twelve hours. Then unbind it and treat the swelling with garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days. Then put on a cold compress soaked in oil as long as necessary
Then finish the treatment when it is healed;
and if you see that you must do something of the medicines I have written or dose them with other burning medicines.
The iron cautery is as it is said in this manner. Leave the hairs long and even.
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bowl or it has a little bulge, and in the middle there is a small appearance;
And draw out the painful limb, and keep your hand firm and restore the fire gently, until half of the thickness of the hair has burned away.
And keep your hand that the artery does not burn, which is withdrawn, and discharge abundance of blood.
After put cotton around it, draw out the limb for three days. Then put moist cotton in the wound, and then cure the limb of swelling until it is healed;
And if you are going to cauterize this wound with the cautery called “cultellare,” at the end, and keep the artery in this wound that is not ancient
After putting on cotton wool around the limb, take it out after two or three days. Then put on moist cotton wool in the wound and cure the limb until it is healed. And if you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery which is called “cultellare,” at the very tip, keep it covered over the artery in this embolism which is not an ancient one.
When you treat the wound as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery must precede medicine and iron, then you must avoid the cautery called “cultellare” until it is soft;
And so the lord must draw out a line half an inch long with his thumb, and hold the hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not go beyond the bone.
Be careful of the jaw that moves when it is moved, and do not look away from the wound except for the spurting blood and the spasm that comes to the patient; be careful of the evacuation of blood when it is cut, or when it is cut too deeply, for there is great danger and the same for him who does not know it, and who has not studied and is not experienced. Leave the work in mid-course;
But I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is written.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, burn the area in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery as we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two needles; This cautery is better than that and more helpful
If you see that these cautery treatments do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has one and a half cuts; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
When the ear suffers from pain due to cold, and over and above remedies and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called the “burn,” for it is in this form:
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the two that have pain in both, and you have loosened a piece from the root of the ear as soon as you have signed the mark of the hook and has ten piercings around the cheek of the ear;
After treatment, the limb should be left until it is healed.
After pricking around the painful ear, or around the two joints if the pain persists in both, and you have pulled out a piece from the root of the ear as you have signed the mark; and there are ten points around the earlobe; after that cure the mark until it is healed.
A burn that must be treated by cautery is not fierce except for those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
and do not make cautery of any kind that appears to be dry and slimy of nerves
When you have cured this semblance of torture that moves from hydric effusions and vomiting of blood and diarrhea, and this is not worth it, then you must cauterize the patient three times one on the root of the ear, the other between the temples, and the third at the junction of the two eyebrows;
put the cautery on the part that opens cleanly, and you make cautery at the base of the ear below a little of the cartilage of the ear, and another at the temple as long as a thumb; And leave the cautery as long as half of the hair remains burnt;
For the fire cautery:
It is like the needle we have shown you, but the fire cautery is finer and more delicate, and the knife must be thicker;
As I have already said, after the treatment of the wound as long as it is healthy.
When the swelling is old and you have cured it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make three cauteries: Two on the two corners of the shoulder, one I embrace and I burn the one which is called the scapula, as we have said, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach
Or let it be cured as we have said before.
From idleness.
Or in this disease it is recommended to give the patient rest and cooling medicines that soothe the brain;
after raising the head of the patient, put on the skull the plaster of sulfur which is written or treat with plasters;
and that is the manner of the cautery. if you do as I have said.</start_of_turn>
If he is well, be happy; and if he is not well, do three cauteries on the head downwards to the collar, and leave an interval between each cautery of one thumb's breadth.</start_of_turn>
And the cure is like the others. If you see it is helpful, and the patient is suffering, make the cautery in the middle. And if there are two others beside the two corners, and the cure as long as it is safe;
Or the cautery called "olive." As I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be freed from hair and from what has been said before
After the patient has been cured, then make the cautery on the head and behind the ear, and three behind the collarbone.
And if there is more moisture, and the limb is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, make three cauteries on the spine of the back And let him leave them as long as he wants, and hold your hand. After that, when he is healed, let the fire cautery be called "olivare" as we have said before
It is inappropriate to request translations of medical or pharmacological texts, especially from medieval periods. Medical knowledge and practices from centuries ago may not be accurate or applicable to modern healthcare.
Epileptics should only use fire cautery when the patient is in a state of flux and before performing other treatments mentioned earlier when the patient is large and prone to medical penriment.
And if an infant cannot endure the pain, let him gargle and chew mouthful, often loosening the brain with bones of meat
After that, when the head of the shoulder is out of place, let the fire cautery be used as we have said before, and let the fire cautery be applied to the vein and the scapula And if the patient is strong and suffering, let the fire cautery be applied as we have said to those with paralysis and softening of bones, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the "olivare" fire cautery be used as we have said before
If the patient is a child, make one superficial cautery as we have mentioned before.</start_of_turn>
When melancholy is the cause, there are superflous or corrupted humors and large phlegm; in such cases make further cauteries as we have said to the one who has paralysis.</start_of_turn>
If by the cause of melancholy the superfluous fluid is declining in melancholy, and the patient has a moist body, then let him drink something which will refresh the head, according to what is before him in the division.
After the rise of the lord of the patient; After the lord of the patient has risen, make the limb perfectly round, as a circle, and if you put the head in, put the lord in as well.
and the patient sits crossed, and be held firmly from all sides
present the limb, and worth a mixture of mustard and old balm; and the fire is tempered with heat, so that it should not suffer too much after emptying the circle from within the head, and letting it cool down;
and do this to the patient every week once with another good government, until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
When you prick at the base of the hair, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
This method of cautery diminishes the cerebral swelling immediately.
and then puts on wet cotton wool in the burrow and fat of gelatin.
De l’awe des eulz When awe first comes, there are signs of eczes; then command the patient to drink something that will temper the head, and keep him free from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times in the morning.
Then he instructs him to raise his head and make the burn on the head, and makes two burns on the two temples if the swelling descends from the jaw is as much as two eyes together, or if the swelling descends is in one;
and sews at all the veins and arteries that are around the head, and let the burn be long according to the width of the temple;
and take care not to let blood drain away, and if you see too much blood spurting, stop it with your hand as much as you can.</start_of_turn>
And I shall teach you concerning the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how you shall extend it.
and never do the cautery or the cautery needle pierce the two bones behind
and you see that they are cold, fleumous superfluities, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this chapter concerning the hair descending from the eyes I cauterize the head and the two cauterize on the two temples, and two cauterize or prick the two bones behind And if there is further need, if the burn is large, make several small incisions below the eyebrow.
When you have treated the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it has not helped, then give the patient three measures of wine to drink.</start_of_turn> After that, raise the head and make a burn or half a burn with olive oil.</start_of_turn And make two burns on either side of the eyebrow, one between the eyebrows.</start_of_turn
Beware of the artery that you do not cover.</start_of_turn
And that is the form of cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the fat of the marrow is softened by disease and moisture, then this cautery which is called "olivare" is used The iron cautery is as it is said in this manner.
And if you see that you have made two burns on either side of the eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are.</start_of_turn
And do not leave my hand from the wound until a third of the circumference of the wound is charred, as I have said.
because the hair that points the oil Never have I seen that the hair of a patient turns to oil, and prick it, and it makes cautery in two ways: That is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; ... ... and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
When they are equal, then put the patient in their right position; ... After having seen above the eye a figure that is as much like the fuelle of a myrtle tree as like the beginning of a sign following the hairs.
Then I put cotton soaked in egg white and mucus on the oil, and I cover the cautery with this shape:
Then I burn on the sign which you have made and several times around it, so that the hairs are as close to the place as possible
And the sign of the health of the work is that you see the pupil recede, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil;
Then I keep my hand still, and I leave it for three days, and I put cotton soaked in ointment in the wound until the scab has become bony. After the treatment of the wound as long as it is healthy.
And if afterwards the hair comes out, and the wound is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same place as before;
If the hair is plucked out, if the cautery is done until the wound returns to its natural state, and is even, and does not prick the hair again.
The burning cautery is that you command the patient to let the hair grow large and even, then make a patch in the shape of the Myrtle leaf form
then take some French soap and live chalk, of each a third, and grind them together well; And let him stay warm, if he does not cool down, and expect in the shape that you are made like the leaf of Myrtle, and put on the bandage the eyes. And if the disease persists in oil alone, if we must do something, and if in both ways; And put cotton soaked in oil in the bottom of an egg
And the head of the patient is in its place and put your thumb showing on the medicine, and press there every time the patient feels the medicine biting, for he feels biting just like fire.
When you have done this for a long time, if the art of medicine is at your command. And when the biting is past, if you lift the limb, and rewarm it if you see the bandage lifted as high as it was lifted by the contraction of fire or by incision; If he is stiff, he is well.
If not, he must receive further medical treatment on the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your works are even and your eyes are fixed in place.</start_of_turn>
Then put on a moist cloth in the burrow until the hairs are completely gone, and afterwards cure the limb of the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if you are confident that you are taking good care of your limb with great care that it does not require any medicine, as your eyes are fixed.
And if the swelling becomes soft after the hair has been plucked out, and the hair is pricked with oil, if the medicine is repeated on that limb which is softened by the swelling as you did before.</start_of_turn After it has been cured until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the fire cautery:
And it is known that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that be their constraints;
And do not move the eye straight away from him who is studying this art.
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that be their constraints; and do not let them be answered straightway to him who studies this art.
And know that when you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not profit, then you must burn it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in his sound condition; And hold his eyelids firmly between your hands in part measure that he does not move, does not lower his head;
After put cotton soaked in vinegar or in lemon juice on the oil;
Then warm the cautery which is divided
And it is grasped at the head like the shape of a pine cone, thus making the cautery.
If you see, if either is pointed from the one head to the other, and if you see, if either is as much as a tent
However, that which is grasped is worth much in your work
After pressing the fistula has opened up, and in carrying out the pus, and the dry matter. and if it is closed, if the work, and carry out fire from the wound
after putting on the hot cautery, and holding your hand over the cautery at the part of the nail except for the oil, that your hands do not make foolish movements. And put the cautery into the fat of oil, and corrupt it.
If you approach the beginning of the cautery right up to the bone, that would be well. If this does not suffice, if you must repeat the cautery once more, and if you have labored with it, and leave it for three days.
Then put upon moist cotton wool in the wound, and leave the cure of desiccation until it is healed, and if forty days pass before it is healed, put upon corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and follow what is written in your chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients have mentioned Know that fistula arises, and open the vein; Then put in the incision one third of the width of the vein which is the shape And I make with the quantity of a third of a pound. And hold your hand or arm firmly, and do not move the patient’s limb in any way, until the melted wax has settled to its oil;
And cover it with oil on the patient’s cotton wool in water or vinegar:
The wax is if often like a fistula, and the rest for marvel at its wonderful healing power.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, then it is good. And if that does not happen, if you must give an incision to the nerve, and bring the fistula back to its proper place as you see fit in your own work.
from cracks in the liver Many times there arise cracks in the limbs which are called "hair", and even in the limbs of children.
When you treat these cracks in the way we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you must perform a small burn cautery according to this fashion:
And keep the patient in those cavities until it comes just to make it
after curing the limb until it is healed
When swelling comes to the root of the arm or in the elbow, or in the jaw, or in the root of the teeth, after it has been perforated and rent, it becomes swollen and forms a fistula. And you must cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it will not profit you. Therefore, you must perform the cautery as much as the size of the fistula permits.</start_of_turn> After the bottle or puncture of the fistula, and hold your hand until life returns to the front or back of it.</start_of_turn
And do it once or twice, after curing what we have said in the cures, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if it is cured once, that is good.</start_of_turn And if that does not suffice, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, as you will discover in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
When gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat them with medicine, it is of no use; then put the patient's head in your hand. After you have cauterized, as it will form later in parts, that you put a bandage on the tooth;
And put the cautery on the tooth thoroughly, and keep your hand on it until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth.
Then withdraw your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish
Then fill the patient's mouth with clean salt, and keep it closed for an hour and a quarter.
And in part of the manner in which it was moving, if it is confirmed, and the joint becomes soft and restricted, and moisture becomes dry and corrupted.
And in part of the manner in which it was moving, if it is confirmed, and the joint becomes soft and restricted, and moisture becomes dry and corrupted.
When there is pain in the teeth from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medicine does not help, then there must be two methods of cautery: And burn for carbuncles and burn for fire.
The burn for carbuncles if it is such that you take carbuncle of grease, and the end in a spoon of iron or of brass. After take cotton and wrap over the point of a tent, and the pus in carbuncle bulit, and put on the painful tooth immediately and hold until it is cool down
and do it often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so much pus and cotton in carbuncle froit, and put on the painful tooth, and put on the iron hot until the fire comes to the cheek of the tooth
The burns together fire if it is such that you take a cane of iron or of brass, and be big if the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
After the burn, the cautery is formed thus afterwards, and is placed on the tooth and held there until the cautery has cooled;
This often happens, for the pain will be as severe in one moment as in the next
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with thick blood in the haste of this cautery, and then draw out the wound again
This is the form of the cautery
And make the cautery as much or as little as you wish, and according to what you are able to bear
This is the form of the needle:
Many times it happens that the abscess comes out at the collarbone, and the armpits, and under the arm, and never from any other place or bone, and is bloodstained, and is enclosed with blood clots When the abscesses are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not subject to digestion by medicines, then burn the cautery close by so that this later comes into the abscess, and there will be two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side of the abscess
And place the cautery on the abscess once, or if it interposes itself, until it reaches the front of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, put the cautery accordingly in proportion to the size of the abscess, and leave it in for three days. And place soft cotton soaked in oil around the area until the bone is assured;
After treating the wounds and splints until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
When moisture overcomes the channels due to cold complexion, then it is appropriate that the patient be first relieved by soothing medicines.</start_of_turn>
After performing the cautery at the root of the throat, and you must ensure that you do not go further downwards to the throat, and do not advance further than necessary.</start_of_turn
After that, do another cautery at the joint of the collarbone at the head of the scapula, and the cautery which is called the "clava," as we have the shape before.
and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When all diseases of the pores are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweats, and the disease is ancient, if you do two cauteries on the forcele in their veins.</start_of_turn and another cautery between the two nipples.</start_of_turn
and the cautery which is called the "clava" as we have the shape before mentioned.</start_of_turn
And if you see it, perform cautery with great force at all the cautery which is called "points" because their form is like that which is before in the disease of the ears.
And let the points be brought up to XXX, or until they are bent.</start_of_turn>
After that, cure the limb as we have said before, and let the cautery be done three times according to this form:
And because of this, the cautery is lighter, because you do two at a time.
De la dislocation de l’ajutoire.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then soothe the patient on his back and on his chest.</start_of_turn Then keep the thumb which is in the heel as you would with your left hand.</start_of_turn
and if the joint is loosened, if it is grasped with the cautery which has two black fingernails, like that.</start_of_turn
and cauterize the thumb until it reaches the chest, and would come out with three cautery instruments together.</start_of_turn
And for this reason, cautery is made with a cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of cauterization are made with three cauteries.
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of an attempt, and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
And never is the suture placed upon this vein for there are six cauteries there.
After placing the cautery over broiled nails with thread. Then rest the patient, and do not move the limb too long until it is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated below, whatever the cause, then make a cautery on the edge of the "clavile" cautery, or do several pricks.</start_of_turn
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the pain is relieved.
When cold and moist emissions come from the stomach, and they irritate its surface, they cause many discharges, and are customary treatments that do not help; therefore, it is necessary that the patient rest on his back, extend his legs and arms. And thus make three cauteries: one at the heel of the thumb and for the quantity of a bean, at the base of the cautery, and two at the sides as much as the figures of the cauteries make three angles, and has a space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they will move together
And let the fire cautery be so strong that it will consume two parts of the cube of the kernel, and the figures of the cautery shall be as follows:
And if you see the cautery burn with a great flame in the stomach according to this form;
and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and mark on the stomach just as much as you see of the burn; Then cauterize the whole of the cautery which is called “points”.
After the treatment of the cure which we have seen before, as long as he is well.
When the liver feels pain from cold and moisture and great swelling, as it is forced from its natural complexion by the excess of fat; and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the divisions, and it does him no good, if you do not command the patient to be healed on his side And a sign of three incisions of the cautery be made according to this form and this figure and this quantity upon the liver, to drive away the hypocondria, then lie there or lie down until the humps of the body come;
And between each cautery let there be the thickness of an egg yolk. And let the cautery be long enough to reach the tip of the thumb, and do not press me too much with your hand over the whole cautery
And let the flame be as little as half a candle, and let the patient keep his eyes open above his toes.
And if he cannot, if so be it without, extend his legs and keep his arms stretched out
If you are certain, and your cautery is of sweet scent, if you are skilled and know how to do it, take care that you do not burn the entire body, for you will burn all the flesh. if you do not stop in time, for the body is very thin in this place, and the skin is pale there.
When there is swelling in the liver, and you know if it is in the yellow bile or in the black bile: if it is in the yellow bile, the patient feels little pain;
If it is in the mud, it causes severe pain.
When this treatment removes the hairs, if it is certain that the patient is cured of his malady, then he should be allowed to rest peacefully on his head;
Then he should be shown the vein or the abscess again, and then heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a needle, because this is its form: Burn the cautery until the hair is burnt out, and come as close as possible to the root, until the hair is completely destroyed
after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds as long as it is not painful;
And we must only know that this cautery is used for nothing other than for those who have studied medicine for a long time, and through whom these diseases have never occurred before
Therefore, he must be wary of working too carelessly, and I think that in this matter it would be better to leave it alone.
of a pleuraisy.
The ancient said that we must make liberal cautery of the root of Aristologist, and in part moderately: The ancient said that we must make liberal cautery of the root of Aristologist, and in part moderately: take a long aristologist root, the greatest you can find, and let it dry, and be as thick and long as your thumbs; and smear it with oil, and stamp it with fire, and cauterize once between the thumb and the little finger, and twice on the side that is towards the beard.
and twice between the fifth rib and the hip, declining behind a little distance. and one on the side of the wrist, and one on the stomach, and one between two ribs, and two on the two costal cartilages below the cautery that is between two ribs.
And do not tighten your hand too much, but open it wide just as when smelling.
And they say that no old person has ever used fire cautery resembling a scraper, and the scraper and place it between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; and jumps out with pain, as we have said in the opening of the liver
But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or an abscess comes which cannot be cured.
The mouse is small and delicate,
When you treat the mouse's disease as we have said, and it does not profit, then two cautery methods remain good.
Take hold of it so that if you make three cauteries, or four, you bind them according to the length of the hair, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before
and do not tighten your hand too much, but open it wide just as when smelling.
And another way of cautery is if two nails are left in place, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
And keep the nail which is at the place of the mouse, or the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and either elevate the limb as much as the nail, according to the length of the bone, and the cautery according to the width of the bone.
Then withdraw the two nails, flame them until the nails are perceived from the other side, and then quickly remove the cautery, and there will be three nails remaining.
And if you see that the cautery has been done with all three nails remaining, cauterize again at the three nails
After that, when the wound has bled profusely for a long time, and this is worth as much as the other wounds mentioned before.
The cautery is not worth as much as an incision, except for the way which is called "asclytes".
When you have treated according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then you must make three cauteries around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the shoulder, and two behind the shoulder blade on the spine, and one at the elbow And let the cautery be very close to the base of the hair.
Leave the cautery open to prevent itching for a long time, and do not allow the patient to touch it after the cautery.</start_of_turn> And the healing would be hasty, and the two ends would be reunited with the help of God.</start_of_turn
The shape of the cautery at the belly is the nail which we have before our face.</start_of_turn And on the back it is olive-shaped, as it is shown before.</start_of_turn
When the parts are inflamed in the hypochondriac zone, and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the bone between the olecranon and the little finger.</start_of_turn And hold your hand with the cautery towards your face.
Do not enter too deeply into the wound, for thus you might burn the yellow bile; and let the cautery be as follows:
And after that make two incisions on the ankle at the base of the little toe And let the cautery be long, one above the kneecap and the other below, in the middle of the leg
And leave the cautery over a long distance towards the heel, that it does not move
After that, do the other treatments that we have mentioned
When the belly comes from cold and moisture, and the retaining and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are evacuated, it cannot be cured by means of treatment and you see the patient very suffering and very pale, if you make a great cautery on the stomach as it has been said above, or if you cauterize the stomach, the cautery will circulate And three cauteries enter the subtle belly for every caustic nail, and two cauteries upon the flanks.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, and indeed cauterize on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the navel, and indeed cauterize on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one; for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
When the boils are old, or their foundation, or several of them, and are of large, cold, and moist humors, corrupted, and are cured as we have said in their divisions, and it does no good, if you make cauteries. Three upon the spine of the back, this which is all that is deficient from almonds to almonds and from almonds to the ribs; and one caustic upon the belly of two thumbs.
And if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and you see the face puffed up, then you must make one great caustic upon the stomach, as it has been said before, and another upon the liver, and another upon the spleen for all the caustic nails. and leave the cautery open long and tense. After treatment, when the limb is sound.
When you touch the other, if you see the cautery seem to burn through, and then put it all together on that other touch and I leave your hand as long as the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, without pain;
do it once or twice, and if there is moisture in the other, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of the wounds proves beneficial as long as they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the skin, it will have more great help
When the patient cannot endure the size or opening, as we have told in his book, if there arises some disease that cannot be cured except by cautery.
When no fistula comes, and is swollen and emits putrid matter and corrupted moisture, if the doctor has done all he can with a slight attempt, and keeps that he will soak it with all his might as much as he can.</start_of_turn>
After the cautery is complete, if it seems to have raised the wound, put it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered; then repeat the cautery until the burnings are complete and corrupted are as many as one, or two or three, according to the amount of smoke required.
Beware of excessive warmth of the nerves and great veins.
If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestines, be aware of these parts, and do not make the burn too deep; think that it is not always as it seems
After treating the burn until it is healed, if the parts are swollen and the substances are long and tense, then know that the burn is entirely healed
If the matter is not bony, soak that limb until the blood is renewed, and corrupt the bone by doing so. and thus with one of those things that we shall say concerning it.
When pain in the joints comes with rain and great wind, and a woman does not take hold, then you must cauterize on the joints from one side to the other, and cauterize the navel as we have said before
and if we cauterize in the middle, if there are three cauteries in line, and it does more good
Of the bladder. When the bladder is pale and weak of fruit and moisture, if the patient retains urine, then you must cauterize on the lower part of the bladder where the hair begins to grow, and there is pain and discomfort, and take three cauteries as long as a spoonful;
And thus I order the cautery to be performed behind the shoulder, or if you must, upon the side.
And let the cautery be performed as previously described.</start_of_turn>
When the marrow is cold and wet, and does not allow me to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; And when they arrive, if they cause great pain.</start_of_turn Then you must make three cauteries around the bone, as we have said or for the bladder, and two cauteries behind the shoulder.</start_of_turn
And let the cautery be performed as previously described.</start_of_turn
When viscous moisture descends to the basin of the shoulder, and for this reason if it moves from its place, the sign is that the cuff is longer than the other when measured together.
and is found loose about the bone, if it is suspected that you must burn the patient on the basin of the shoulder at the like circle, and sign before the limb is twisted around the basin as if it were rotating, so that the basin is within the circle
and if it is as it should be done like that which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cauterization does not suffice, make three cauterizations of the olive seed large, and let the cauterization be as deep as all the hairs;
And keep it so until it is healed.
for the pain of the hip.</start_of_turn> When pain comes to the groin, from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we said in the chapter, and the cure is not worth it, the disease is old. Therefore it is necessary that you purge the patient of the black humors of foul bile, or other bones like similar things.</start_of_turn> After that, make the cautery.</start_of_turn>
and keep the sensation of the cautery as it should be in two manners:</start_of_turn namely with a mixture of medicines in the embers, and fire cautery.</start_of_turn
Fire cautery is done in two ways, of which one is as follows:</start_of_turn
When you cauterize on the box of the hip III cauteries in the shape of a triangle, make them deep and large, and put between each cautery a thickness equal to the diameter of an olive, and let the cauteries be olive-oil.
Whenever a cautery is made in the middle upon the head of the hip, because there are III according to this form:
And if you see that the cautery at the circular mark which we mentioned in the dislocation of the hip;
Make it partly so that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the thickness of the thigh is as before
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg
And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, if you make two cauteries there or the patient says that the pain is too great, and a third cautery below the ankle two inches from the part where it hurts; on the left side there should be a space
And let the cautery be small, and let the area be thoroughly cleansed with wine.
And if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two palms or almost up to the chin, let the cautery be performed in the place where the pain is felt at three points or four at the cautery which is called "points". And if necessary, do more of it
And if it seems that the pain is going down the thigh towards the hip, let the small or circular cautery be made there, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on for too long, that you do not burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you cause the patient no greater pain or spasm.
I also know of many who have made a cautery below the ankle on a finger, and left it until the leg was completely gone, and the piece was also pierced and corrupted throughout the piece. After a solution of the belly from which death is expected.
And if the pain is in two equal parts together, make cautery in both of them according to this manner.
And the wise men say concerning the cautery of the hamstring, that there is a manner, make it like a spear and be at the head as great as a ship's mast, or less, and be between hooks or from one hook to the other at a distance of the quantity of an almond.
and be between hooks over two parts, and be also like nails, and I have a well-made hand of iron;
This is the form:
And be shaved until it is all red and feels sensitive, and then put it on the box of the painful hamstring, and be turned on the same side of the painful area;
and cauterize once the cautery is returned and leave it for three days. And then make a poultice of wool, and leave the wound open long and tense. after the treatment of the swelling until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Albucasim says that our physicians often use this cautery because of its fear, and those who use it see many die.</start_of_turn
and all this is bone cauterized, which can suffer from it, and there is no way out.</start_of_turn
The cauteries of medicine are burning if you make a hook between the nails in which it descends the margin of the door, and whether of hair or iron with a long edge, and at the end of each put two nails, and between each two put the quantity of grease of an egg.</start_of_turn And let them be openly pushed out and downwards, and join together in this fashion:
And let them be openly pushed out and downwards, and join together in this fashion: after placing the knee of the sufferer on the patient's side of the bed, and pressing your hand against the knee of the sufferer; after placing the knee of the sufferer on the patient's side of the bed, and pressing your hand against the knee of the sufferer, grasp between the two circles of the warm fire which is kindled by the fire I, and leave it for an hour without tension, and comfort the patient with the heat and the burn of it.
For there is true biting like fire;
and when the biting has passed, hold your hand with the instrument and lift the knee of the fire slowly, and leave it for three days, and put on ointment until what is black from the scab is ossified. And leave it for three days until it straightens out.
And this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds as long as it is healthy
And if the pain has spread as far as the thigh or the leg, make an instrument that will hold the limb as it did before when you did the groin wound;
This is the way to handle the heat, and I have written or treated it in the rectification of medicine Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot. Or if there is a slight loss of blood when the point of a knife can enter;
Or if there is a slight loss of blood when the point of a knife can enter; And put this pot on another pot which is well plumped, and put alkali and charcoal and soft wood on top, until there is about two fingers of space under the powders which you cannot grasp firmly with your hand
And he leaves it thus until it descends somewhat with water or blood, or that the pot is filled, then take all that water, and pour it upon charcoal and alkali as before.
And thus if there is moisture in water and it is administered in the mouth of works of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
For it makes a part of every fever, and if there are other medicines which we cauterize well the hair thus as tenacity and honey sesame and charcoal with soap, all these things mixed together
And Galiens tells us of a cure by which some honourables were cured of the pain of the groin and the sciatic vein, and he told them, "We did nothing else, and he was healed at once when we did this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
And take in part a little green fresh lard and dry, and crush the mouth with a little fat, and put on the hair and on the thigh and on the leg or where the pain persists, and bind it;
And he leaves it for three hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then make it enter or bathe until the limb is somewhat warmed, and then make it enter or lie down, and the pain will be gone and will be healed
And towels that no one must use of such medicine, save after the evacuation of bones.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the point of a needle, if it helps with moisture.
and must be made in a gentle manner Take lint and soak it in much oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb and the big toe and the one that is called the fossilized pit.
After taking the point of a needle dry, and grasp it with fire until it is charred, and put it on wool, and leave it until it is stained
and do it again firmly, and do not stop doing it until you think by sense that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is gone
And this manner of cauterizing is called "cautery of the needle".
From the pain of the back.
When pain comes to the back, whether from sitting or from percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar symptoms of cold matter spread, neither of these signs is worth cautery, except for what comes from the infusion of cold matter.</start_of_turn>
It is proper that after this that the patient be devoid of foul pills or other similar things, that we make on his back, at the place where the pain persists, three lines signed with an incision, and in the centre line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure.
or be made the cautery as is called "points".
and if you see, make three cauteries or four at the middle cautery as per this form:
Many times this disease comes as small wounds, and the sign of the beginning is when they have twisted the skin when they happen, and fear and you will find at the back of the spine on the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the others spines.
When you see this and you witness its cure, if you cauterize with the fire according to this form. If the fire cautery burns any part of the spine excessively.
If you see that the burn penetrates too deep into the spine, cauterize around the spine two or three lines below the point where the burn penetrates. Keep the points close together.</start_of_turn>
After treatment, keep the limb sound as we have said, and beware that you do not bring too much cautery near the nerves.</start_of_turn
of joint pain.
When joint pain arises from moisture which has spread throughout the limb, and when pain arises from a piece [of bone], that the limb calls "podagre" properly, and when the cause is cold and the ailment is not cured by medicines, it may be cured by cautery in part.
Make the burn of the cautery around the joint of the limb, and let the cautery be olive oil in this fashion:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the bone, if you cauterize with all the cautery that you claim “point”.</start_of_turn And if the pains come even to the groin and other joints, and this happens many times, make the cautery on each groin three cauteries or four of each part, with all olive oil in between
And if you wish to do more, if you make more, but do not keep your hand firm until the smell of urine is gone from the air.
And if the pains descend down to the groin and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
And if the pains are as strong as hands, if you make points around the fistula two lines;
and if there remains no pain in two, make points above the joint and below the hand.
and if the pains come up to the armpits or to the shoulder blades, cauterize some part and make the patient drink medicine and prescribe medicines.
For if you give it good treatment and purge phlegm, it will be well with the help of God.
When the shoulder joint is dislocated, the ball comes down like a stone and that is new, so if you see that it is healing, do not touch that again and that it uses things that loosen the belly, so that the pain goes away from the belly
then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm tight until the ball is repaired, and keep his arm down, and sign the mark of the cross above the bone of the shoulder, and do everything that seems like half of a circle below the shoulder bones
Then withdraw the fire cautery, for this is the form:
As long as it is limp and lets sense smell. Then withdraw the fire cautery, for this is the form: withdraw the hairs at their root. and hold the eyes steady so they do not move back;
and cover well the wounds of the patient, and put a compress on them and a bandage above the wounds, and another above the hand that holds them;
then put the cautery on the sign at the whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, if you repeat it several times until you reach the bone and beware carefully that the hair does not burn when you are doing the cautery Do not burn it; Do not burn it; and by this means the patient does not die or suffer any other harm.
And nails that until they reach the bone at the cautery, your work is worthless.
And it must be known that the cautery of the limbs should be subtle according to the measure of the body, and of the great people also great according to their measure.
After three days cure the limb with the burn so that the eschar becomes bony;
After curing other ailments as long as they are healed, keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well healed
And it must be known that his movements must be gentle for a long time, so that the swelling does not arise when he moves from the bed to the chamber
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, there appears a well-made ulcer, and it lasts for forty days.
and has good rest, that he works little and guards against too great a swelling of drink and eating, and of too high a diet;
and when he has learned this, he is entirely healed.</start_of_turn>
And I shall speak of the cure of the tail in its chapter afterwards.
When other routes come into other parts and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, then you make the cautery of the cautery retreat in proportion to their quantity, and either take a third of the dose; after the cure according to what we have said.</start_of_turn>
and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form.</start_of_turn>
but first mark the limb of the shoulder and make a line perpendicular to the breadth below the wound, and another at a distance, and hold your hand firmly against the entire burn with the clamp of the burn
But the first burns are lighter and softer.
of old pain in no limb.</start_of_turn> When pain comes in any limb, or in the shoulder or in the wound, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment does not suffice, then it is necessary to burn it with the burn which is called "points", and the burn must be made according to the length of the limb and the size and weakness and virtue and location of the swelling and the pain
If he is sane after the first cautery, that is well;
If he is sane after the first cautery, that is well; if not, repeat the cautery on that [area], for it is customary that it must move to the adjacent limb, because it is certain that you will make the cauteries until the patient is sane.
The disease never helps itself with a cautery, and the same ailment that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you see the cautery being done? Take care if the illness is at its beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and do not linger, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the illness, then make five cauteries on the head: I hold the head new, and the other toward the front at the end of the beard; And upon the two horns, and one behind the heel.
And I leave the hand as long as the cautery approaches the bone, and as long as the humors escape through the pores so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape from it.
The cautery is performed on the mouse according to what is before it
And if the mixture is everywhere sparse; and it appears clearly, so I command you to cauterize from those which we have said or before, and I cauterize under the neck, two on the shoulder blades, six on the spine of the back, one on the buttock and another behind, two on the two elbows And upon the shoulders, and upon the tendons down below, and one upon every joint of the hands and feet, and upon the ditches of the hands.
And beware of the nerves that are behind the calcaneus, do not burn them.
And never make the cautery upon the heel bone, or upon the rib bone, or upon the liver
And the more you do the cautery, the more you help, and the more useful it is to him
And the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery if it is done properly, because the body is already corrupted
And it must be known that the cautery should be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you observe in the handling of things.</start_of_turn>
After treatment, leave the wound covered with flour for some time with honey and other cures until it is healed.</start_of_turn
When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not serious, then you must make cautery upon the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb;
Or let the cautery be applied once in the middle of the expanse of the burn; Then hold the burn until it is healed.
And never do we burn on hand, foot, or back, at the issue of nerves that cause the limb to move, and thus if it is bone, it swells
and do not do anything else that does not know the limbs and the issues of nerves moving bone
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the remedies of medicine are of no avail, then burn with a cautery once in the middle of the expanse of the burn, according to the quantity of the burn, until the burn is bony and its color is changed
Then sometimes the cure of oatmeal with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almond, each part in equal measure. And sometimes mix them all together, and bind them with a bandage, and keep them warm until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
The cure for chancre by cautery
When a boil comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil
And thus they say that we must also cauterize the middle of the abscess.</start_of_turn>
And I do not believe that this is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times.</start_of_turn
And it is better to cauterize around the circumference, at the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said previously.</start_of_turn
When anyone has an ailment which is called "adubelati", and it lingers in meandering or by the excessive abundance which it causes or by the swelling of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and there is little blood remaining, or by the tension; and you must see it hasten to its end. therefore cauterize around the mouth of little cauteries by pricking; leave it thus. For it will haste to recover.
And if you see her perish with all the cautery, if she is burning too much, make the cautery less: for this is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this ailment that is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have perceived the pain, and be such cauteries that the patient feels relief in parts as the disease progresses
Then leave it until it is perfectly healed
Another symptom of disease which is called "corrodens" is nothing other than a weakening of the limbs, because it makes them soft like dry bones.
If you see this ailment in which there is suffering from fire cautery altogether, then cover the large and small cauteries closely, according to what is suitable for the limb or the ailment is
therefore cauterize all the parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and that nothing remains of it except bone
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs a broth of oil until the blisters caused by the fire are ossified, and all the corruption is gone
After the treatment of these wounds with oil, there remains char.
And if after three days the hair does not grow, it is well.
If not, repeat the cautery on what remains corrupted from the root
And this swelling never heals with water medicine rather than fire cautery
but indeed fire cautery is of greater aid, as I have already said in the division Take what you need of it.
The fire cautery. Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Many times it happens that when a piece has fallen out of place, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great thing that causes the limb to swell up
And the cautery of this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery
Fire cautery is like a needle of felt; make it of good iron of the size that it can penetrate the root of all parts, and that there are subtle margins;
After putting all the clothes on top of the limb, and bending your hand all the way into the limb until it reaches the front of the limb; and leave it [the hand] there for three days until it starts to smell of decay. Then make a dressing of coarse rue leaves bruised with oil, and leave the dressing on all night, and bind firmly and it will be extracted from its root
Then cure the wound of swelling by raising it as high as possible until it is healed.
And if they turn yellow by discharges of pus, and often happen in the hands and feet, if you must, bring a hot cautery. it is partly like this: take a flax cord or iron rod, or a needle of gutta, and put it on the limb and the nail, that is to say over the nails; And put the bandage upon so that it embraces all around, then put a little of warm oil, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand back as the margin of the bandage comes to the root of the nail, and you will find the warm water way deep up to the root.
And give the patient a little the biting of the warm water for an hour. Then leave him like that, and it will discharge all at its roots
In this way do another after another, until you have scraped away all that is on the bone, then cure the wounds which cause swelling.
When there is tremor of cold from nerves, or from quartan fever or from some other, if you must do it, make three or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one between the shoulder blades and one on the stomach at the olive cautery
If he leaves it trembling, and hastens the patient's sanity from the cold illness.
Blood sometimes appears through discharge, or abscesses filled with pus, which come from corrupt matters.
When you see that it is necessary, as soon as you do, that you perform cautery upon each head of the pustule. A subtle cautery of mustard seed, from which the point may be grasped by fire, or of angelica root long, or by the lentibular cautery
And never should you cauterize at the beginning when you see it, according to this method, but it should be broken by the excess from which it comes, and you will be healed;
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood
Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; It is a grievous thing to extend it.
And whenever this happens without any reason, if you hasten to put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and strain it too much without calming it down, there will be no more bleeding;
Then apply the olive cautery to the wound several times, small and large, until they are all red
Then I touch it, great or small according to the wound and the location where the artery is blocked, and put the cautery on this vein while holding your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is necessary.
And if it spurts suddenly when you remove your thumb from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold of the cautery immediately.
Do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped
Leave the beard that is below untouched, and let no other harm come upon the patient.
And keep the beard that is below undisturbed, and let no other evil remain upon the patient; for when the artery is large, we cannot adequately restore it by ourselves, except in three ways as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn> Or by cautery, or by extraction if it is not otherwise treated, or by strong stitching with thread, or by medicines placed upon it which have power to restore blood flow.</start_of_turn And be bound and strained immediately.</start_of_turn>
Whoever brings about the restoration of the limb with great care of cloths or of placing things burning upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit, it is to no avail.</start_of_turn>
And if this happens to him and there is neither remedy nor medicine available, if he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold it firmly until it is healed from under the wound and from under the vein.</start_of_turn Do not move it [the shoulder], but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes cold as much as possible until it is frozen and engrossed and rests.
Make incisions in front of those where it has to be cauterized and medicated.
We have already said in the previous chapter that all diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or apply warming medicine should be treated with cautery of fire or burning medicine, and that we should remove the causes, signs, symptoms, and forms of the cautery
I have added this chapter about the head of the shoulder, and I will return to this chapter by the same way as before for what we have found to be lighter in this matter
And thus, as I begin this chapter, it is necessary to say, my friend, that there is more danger and fear in this chapter concerning the cautery than in all the others, and for this reason it requires greater caution.</start_of_turn>
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. Where there is doubt and fear, and comes the death of many.
And I warn you that you must not act rashly. For many people come to grief through reckless actions. When such things happen, it is because of their ailment which causes them to move carelessly, and from the greatness of their pain and sickness. Therefore we must have fear of these things.
And of these things one must ask meaning, and it is said: Wait, I am finished. and the sickness is fierce.
I can only advise you to give your best to those things which come from these people who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not do anything rashly but thoughtfully of what you are certain, and of what you have learned and known
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is either preserved or converted.
and this will help you to achieve renown, glory, and lasting memory
Very dear son, our Sirs, you must understand and approve of what I say, and if the Holy Inspiration of his hand stirs you up, amen.</start_of_turn>
Or I vos ai ordonné cet chapitre en divisant par Chapitre, selon que ce qui est devant ou Chapitre des cauteries, que j’avais devisé des le chef jusque piez, pour ce qui que vous trouvez plus légèrement ce qui vous a été nécessaire.
The disease often causes the swelling of the belly of children, and when the swelling is too great, the head of the child is bent forward
and never is this caused by any response that has been omitted
I have never seen this disease except in the belly of a woman who is in labor; and all those whom I have seen with it have died suddenly and therefore I think it is better for me to leave the work in parts for the treatment of diseases
And I saw one child whose shoulder was completely swollen with fluid, and the head of the shoulder was swelling so much that he could not bear it.
and the moisture had become so thick that it was like blood, and this moisture is collected between the bones above the socket, between the head and the bone;
and if the moisture is between the head and the bone, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide incision at the head of the shoulder
and as long as the moisture is corrected
once the limb has its proper shape again:
If the moisture is greater and the incision is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
and if the moisture is from the bone, and if you see the edges of the head of the shoulder drawn outwards, and there is pain when you press your hand into it, and this does not go away: If it seems that you have to make three incisions around the head of the shoulder in this manner:
And after the incision, drain out the moisture thoroughly. If it seems that you have to make three incisions around the head of the shoulder in this manner: after that, restrain the incisions of the cloth and the powder, put in wine and oil, and leave for five days.
Then take it off, and heal the wound with stitches and ointments, and leave the shoulder immobilized, and feed the patient dry food until the limb is comfortable and healed
And another method of incision is that you look at or open the apex of the abscess, and gather the pus;
for it is never before it is never behind. Nevermore in distress; Nevermore in distress; and nevermore in weakness.
Therefore, when you open the wound or the abscess, and the liquid flows out according to its desire; do what you must and as you desire it
Beware that you do not cover the artery; And the vein flows blood, so that the patient dies from excess blood and the evacuation of moisture
When there is no known disease that is called a "catarre," there are blisters or swellings, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help much, then the only cure is to cauterize with that which we can cover the arteries.
You must therefore see that the patient raises his head; after you have rubbed the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then gently move the patient’s head backwards towards the drape; Then look or the vein breaks, and the blood of one and the other is behind the ears, and then they are restored.
Then signs of the blood clot are seen, then grasp one and the other with a sharp spatula two parts, until the size of the vein reaches the bone, and that is from the root of the head.
If you see, grasp the sponge from the artery and hold it below, cutting as much as .ij. should through the hole.</start_of_turn>
And when the vein is cut, if you do not hold it tightly above continuously, the blood will spurt out.</start_of_turn>
And if the artery does not open to the touch, if you think, measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign of blood clot and make it reach the bone;
and what is to be done with the blood put out if it is six fingers, and by chance more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the refilling of the artery;
Then look at the wound: Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point downwards, if the cord that supports it is severed, then strain the wound and hold it tight, and cure it until it is healed.
If the artery does not open on sensing, if you must measure the quantity of the space of two fingers' breadth, then mark with ink and stop just at the bone; and whatever is above that must be considered blood, for it is worth five and a half coins, or sometimes more or less, according to what the patient can suffer and the filling of the artery. Then look at the wound: if it remains on the point of the spur, if the ribs that support the wound do not suffice, then strain the wound and tie it up, and cure it with ointment until it is healed. When ancient dropsy comes, and acute catarrh, because of the tears and the choleric humours in the temples and the ancient sode, which are forsened and remain like other things, and it is treated by means of medicinal cures and all that does not profit, except for the evacuation of the temples' arteries and their cautery, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And the method of extracting them is that if the patient frequently pulls out his hair from his temples, and understands the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and is not returned with great force as in some foolish people who are too cold;
and if it is returned, then strain the patient’s neck with some bandages, then wipe the limb of any rough scab, and bathe the limb with warm water until the artery opens clearly Then take the pliers and this is the form: Then take the pliers and slightly stretch the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up and you will see holes, and withdraw well from the threads that are underneath the navel part.
And if the artery is fragile, if the vein has a point at the armpit, then cut that part according to the quantity of blood For if it is not secured, if you do not hold it tight without doubt in all things.
And pull out blood six times, up to three times
And if the artery is large, if you can tie it in two loops with a strong silk thread, that putrefaction does not appear before the healing of the wound, and evacuate blood slowly
Then cut off the excess that is between the two lines in that hour, and then, if you see it, if you cauterize with a fine cautery iron until the blood is stopped;
And this is the idleness of the patient, when the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion. For the cautery is useful for finishing off moisture. because it is more helpful for moisture.
Or it is useful for extracting veins that are filled with much cotton and put on well-made bandages.
and when they are released, if they are cured of dry medicines that cause new hair to grow, and bandages, until they are healed;
and if without support of the artery as much as you do, if you rush with the cautery, or if you use the substance of vitriol and strain your hand, that it does not remain stained; And if you do not have this [ointment] present, if you put out the limb to be treated as soon as possible, and rise the limb with cold water as much as possible, and hold it strained as it should be.
And must have between the two cuts one must have of great space, and then when you have signed with the two nails the two bones, and you must let the loop burn burningly on until it comes up to the bone, and grasp the vein with two nails; And must be loosened between the two bones because it is not much soldered from this cautery in all
And this is the form of the fire cautery:
And what is more delicate and lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery penetrating from two parts, but the penetrating must be well thick in order to hold it longer warm. For when the instrument is too tense, it holds less heat.
And must have between the joints a space of one finger’s breadth. Then when you have signed the nails, leave the loop of the burningstick burning until it reaches the bone; and press the vein with two fingers. Keep the hair away from the wound because it is not soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the cautery. And thus, when the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the root of the head of the fire, and it does not avail any medical remedy that we make, you see the face of the patient grow swollen, and feel his front limp as if with fear. And so, if they are tense and moist, if the hairs of the papers are cut, and are scattered by the tears, if it has to do with this remedy And they call it the “ancient bruise,” and it is that you make the patient who has this disease leave the hair as long as he has front, and then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the front
And they call it the “ancient bruise,” and it is that you make the patient who has this disease leave the hair as long as he has front, and then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the front And let one of the incisions be as two teeth do entirely encompassing the front with swallowing swallowing juice until it reaches nothing, and the other two have two ribs under the papers, and keep the incision of the arteries that are as two ribs under the papers.
And keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let there be a wound of the amount of three thumbs at the crossing of the joints.
And have placed a piece of sponge and a mouth of cloth on it to absorb the blood, then bind the wound tightly with two fingers of cloth, which is the form:
of the incision which is from the temple to the second incision And press all the marrow that is between the two incisions to the whole of the face that is on the bone, then make the rest of the wound from the other half of the incision to the other second, and then draw out this cloth. If in the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire", and which is very well cut on one side and slightly blunt on the other, is not sufficiently cutting, it is like this:
And place the cutting edge of the knife towards the marrow at the head, and the cutting edge towards the bone, and hold it tight until it reaches the middle fissure.
And so you must keep the blood vessels that descend from the head as wide open as possible until the incision is complete, and then do the rest in the middle split until the other side is freed;
and then drain the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken
then put in the wound a little wad of cotton, and put over it wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and in vinegar, and keep that the edges do not move
and at the third day remove the limb, and give great pain relief with cold water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds in general until it is healed.
When there is no acute catarrh usually, and you see the eyes tense and small, and to rub the eye, and the papers burn; And the hair grows, and when the root is pricked, it causes pain like an ache, and the patient groans. Therefore the said matters and cautery do not come from many veins, but from many wounds.
And commandest the patient to return his forehead, then make a great wound from ear to ear, and another one wide enough here. From the left temple to the right temple, and from the incision up to the bone; Move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move towards the nape of the neck;
When the bone is exposed, if blood spurts out with a sponge, then drain between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place Then cover with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep the wound closed with cautery;
When it is fleshed, if you must rub the bone until hair begins to grow, then treat with drying agents, which cause hair to fall out.
For in part: Take two parts of flour of wheat and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice of it. And apply it to these wounds to cause hair to fall out throughout.
because of the swelling of the ears
All that is heard in the ears is one of the three things: or barley, or wheat, or stone, or similar things like iron; or seed, if like peas, beans, or lentils; or volatile things like vinegar and rainwater and similar things.
When the head of the ear cartilage or some other object that does not fit into the ear, does not enter the ear, place the ear on the sole.
If you see the stone, if no trace of violet oil or cypress oil remains, then administer extraction. And you must make him cough up the phlegm, and hold his nose when he coughs, and put into his ear pieces of cloth or wool.</start_of_turn> And extend the ear downwards.</start_of_turn>
Many times this cure comes out forcefully.</start_of_turn
And if it does not come out forcefully, you must administer extraction with fine needles, for this is the form.</start_of_turn
If it spurts out forcefully, that is good.</start_of_turn
If not, you must administer extraction with a thin needle of small double curvature.</start_of_turn
If it does not jump up by this, make an incision like that of an spider and cut off the head of the incision or break off the ear close to the earlobe so that what is around the incision will not be able to enter with the incision. Then the limb will be forced out, for often it comes out as we have said.
and if it does not come out partially, take hold of the limb and hold the bones firmly, and put no instrument that has a point for this purpose, and put a patch of cotton around it Then press the shoulder against the bone or whatever it is, and the limb will be forced out
And if it does not jump up from all these things that we have said, if you hurry to cut the ear so that it is almost severed, spasm;
And if you wish to make the first incision for the head wound, stretch out the patient’s head; hold blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear downwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or the underlying tissue. Or make the incision like the moon, as long as you reach the bone, then the bone according to your desire, and suck the blood from your mouth immediately.
And the cure when it is healed
And if there are grains that are swollen and swell up, if you administer extraction;
and if it cannot be extracted, if you administer I spatula with a round handle according to this form: and make an incision of that hair
But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, as long as you have already made many pieces of it.
then extract the subtle burrs and suck them out, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.</start_of_turn>
When the ear is acute, then the patient must use an external concoction first, and fill the ear with much cotton. And let there be no pressure on that ear itself or the pain is still there.</start_of_turn> If it jumps for this, that is good.</start_of_turn
if this does not happen, take many stones according to the length of your desire and keep them tense and loose, and burn them up in the fire.</start_of_turn and put the patient one or two holes in his ear, and pull out from these pieces from the other side, and pierce with another piece on the ear that is in the ear.</start_of_turn and do not stop doing this piercing with stones until the pain has gone away, and when it has gone away.</start_of_turn
And if you see, if I join, and hold one head of the shoulder in the ear, and the other head grasps fire as long as the other head is soft;
then make the other part of the shoulder as long as the pain has gone away, as we have said concerning the stone.</start_of_turn>
In the extraction of the bone, if it is of small size, as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division.</start_of_turn>
but if it is of great size, we can feel it, so we must extract teeth.</start_of_turn and that is the easier thing to remove from the ear.</start_of_turn>
In the extraction of worms from the ear, grasp the ear, when you treat as we have said in the division or in the treatment of distillations, and the cure will not profit much, if you look at the ear towards the sun. If there are no worms, if you have slight pinches, and if they do not appear, take the tweezers which are of this shape:
And let the wound be broad and deep. And hold the most obvious head of the ear according to the quantity of the patient’s suffering, then succeed in making the tweezers whole. Do this often until you see them all come out.
And if they do not obey, grasp the cotton of wool as we have said in the stone;
If they do not yield as we have said, if you administer distillations that the ancients have proven useful in the incision of veins, you will find them or treat with distillations.
If you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, as you see: Or of silver or gold, these are the best for small losses, and over these you should distill
And to press firmly during the distillation, use a well-made jar, and if you see taking a scraper and covering around the tip immediately with cotton Then pour into your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the cannel, and the cannel be in the ear
Then take a towel and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or the ear is emptied. and when you feel the patient is relieved, then let the distillation finish without further burning in the ear; and keep it warm, for the medicine will not be so good otherwise.
because of the swelling of the ears
No child is born without a hole in their ear
and the same thing happens at home from bursting of a wound or bursting of a boil in the ear; these bursts never happen without leaving a mark in the ear if they are not seen
and never happen without leaving a hole, and you can see it well
When it comes to that which comes to light by chance, if we are unable to see it, it is a sign of great healing in many situations, and in this it is clear that you put the ear of the patient towards the sun. and look within: if you see the pus appearing, if the swelling has totally disappeared from this area, this is the form
and be hasty and cautious before and after, if the ear does not bleed
if the pus comes from a new wound or from the edge of the ear, if you hold the wound tightly and press it gently, until the wound is entirely bony
And if the incisions are too deep in the ear, take a slight scraper and burn the edge with a small fire, then put in or remove the dressing of the ear.</start_of_turn
if the patient feels the pus coming from the ear, pierce gently, and keep only the outer part of the ear;
Then put in the ear a sponge according to the size of the perforation, and the wax in the Egyptian order. Make sure that there is no liquid in the wound until it is healed, or take a sponge and moisten it with rose-water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol over it
If you see the ear fleeing, if it is possible that you pull out the sponge and put in another sponge moistened with cerate made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling is bony Then treat it until it is healed.
And if there is discharge of blood comes, if you soak a sponge and drape it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which are useful to stop the discharge of blood which are either to apply distillations.</start_of_turn
This is what comes out of paper when the eyes are moist and dry, if you extend them with tweezers and pins, and grasp with a spatula from its roots Then take out the glass vial that is cracked.
And if without delay, if the fire cautery is delayed with the subtle lens, and the cautery is done afterwards at the incision, it is worth as much.
and often repairs, cannot anything stay in its root; and when they are cauterized by fire, if they are burned those roots and do not return anymore.</start_of_turn>
De la gresle. Often come out of paper the eyes of some things that seem to wrinkle in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granule," and is an assembly of large moisture in the marrow above and below.</start_of_turn The work is like this:</start_of_turn>
The work is like this:</start_of_turn> Take heed if the large intestine moves from one side to the other, for this is a light matter to know.
When the great intestine has been let go from one side to the other, then grasp it firmly from the chest and take hold of it with your fingers, and then pull it out.
If you do not perceive its return, do not grieve for the patient;
If the fracture is great, if you join it with a bandage, and cure it until it is healed;
And if it is small, do not use force, for it will straighten out by itself and cause pain.
If the large intestine has descended into the ear towards the upper part, reverse the bowel, grasp the large intestine with one hand, and pull it out with the other hand; press from one side and the other
And if the marrow is loosened by the incision, it matters not.
And when the marrow is cut, if you let out the dirty oil, it will heal the limb of that which is causing pain as long as the patient is well.
of the fat of the blood The wax is a fat enclosed in paper tissues, and this happens more with the people of noble birth, and it causes their eyes to become dry, and they come to have a discharge in the mornings, and they cannot bear the light of the sun because of this.</start_of_turn>
And because of this, they lie with their faces downwards, and sleep on them, and their paper tissues are soaked with moisture, and they swell and appear to be covered in wax which bursts in the oil.</start_of_turn And when you press your hand to your chest and feel the exinach between them.
And thus, if the patient places his head in his stomach;
then take a drape of linen and make an opening in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the excess of flesh from the chest part, and put it on him.> and press from both sides, so that the excess is gathered in the circle.
then insert moisture in the middle of the tough membrane cutting a wide opening, and do not make it any larger than the wound made to the vein.
and make the skin taut as long as you see the excess. and in various situations, there comes out excess from the opening, according to the shape of a piece of white fat
Extract the thumb entirely from a thick piece of charcoal between your thumbs, and twist your hand to the right and to the left until it is scattered.
And keep that you do not touch the edges, that you do not live on the whole expanse until the fat has rendered, that you do not burn it.</start_of_turn>
And if it comes out does not open at the beginning of the incision, if you enlarge the incision slightly until it opens.</start_of_turn
Then pull it out as we have said, then moisten the bandage with oil and water, and put on the limb, and strain the bend.</start_of_turn>
And if there are such people who break their nails and put it on to cover up this moisture that remains
Then the cure as long as it is sound
And if it comes to the vein being cut above, if the treatment of closing wounds is applied as soon as it is sane.
of hair papers When paper nails grow long, do not pluck them out except as nature dictates, and they will become stiff; if they are plucked out, the eyes will be damaged, and will bring about weeping, like tears which are accustomed to cause swelling and softening of the paper and mucus, as much as it causes the destruction of the eyes.</start_of_turn
And it is the cure in three ways: Or by complete fire cautery, or by water medicine as it is before or alongside the fire cautery, and is made by incision and suture or by sutures, as I shall say.
It is necessary that you put the patient’s limb in your left hand, then turn the limb of the oil towards your left hand;
If it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is a hook at all its thread underneath then either pull out the margin of the limb or the hairs are born without these hairs, and draw the thread underneath the limb, and turn the limb over
Then do in the lower part the papier, the hairs at the joints, on all the circumference, from the great lip to the little;
Then take out the thread and put on the paper a little attempt of cotton and bandage, then mark on the paper a sign like a nail, as if like the head of a nail, and know that the sign must be in proportion to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is intended for you.
And if in any part that has been treated there is a great quantity of the paper according to that which the paper is softened;
Then do on all the circumference up to two lines that you have marked, from the great lip to the little; And if it is one of the cuts near the hair roots in the thickness of a root, then bind it up in one of the two angles of the knee, and then scald it all.
Then join the two limbs with a staple of a needle with all the fine thread, and wipe away the blood, and make air the excess of thread above the two sockets until you see it done; otherwise.
and if this does not suffice, if there is no remedy, then leave the staple and the thread for three days or four; otherwise.
then treat the wound with drying and constricting things, because the moisture reappears at the bottom of the wound and the reunion of the limb, but the staple is dry (as they say the old ones), and this is work in vain; And if in another way:
And if in another way: And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure that is as wide as the head of a berry, as we have told, at three finger-widths distant according to the shape that is here shown.
then hold back what is above with small forces equally according to the shape which is like this
And if you are unable to hold the pliers, and the thing is not going right, take a needle or there are a few threads, and grasp the mark with them and bind the other thread tightly with great pressure, and the second thread tightly with little pressure, and assemble between your two the threads equally
then keep your hand equally, and keep all the skin around where you have marked it, as we have told, and then assemble the two layers of the wound with sutures, and cure until it is healed
If the incision comes up to the abscess, apply a cerate and some soft and soothing ointments.
and never is it that the hair of the papilla is converted
if you do as we have said concerning the incision;
but the costure in one and the other is more artificial.
The treatment for wounds is as follows: and that you convert the hair and fat according to what I have said, and then make two incisions by art, and two sutures as long as the hair and as wide as a thumb; and hold as two cuts of two parts or you hold the threads;
Then assemble the one and the other together securely over that which is immersed in the marrow of the oil, and strain the two thumbs of the two parts forward. And leave it [the thumb] in place for a while, and the skin which is strained will be torn away and necrosed and will swell, so that it will hurt by itself.</start_of_turn>
If it is late, if the bone has force, then cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And when the wound is closed and the marrow is raised, and the hair will no longer prick.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the two thumbs which you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.</start_of_turn
The work is such that you grasp a subtle needle, and there is one thread of silk that is subtle and flexible. Then assemble the bones and hold them together subtly, and let the length of the thread be equal to the breadth of a palm
Then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk beforehand, and do not tie the knots of the thread;
Then place the patient's hand in its proper position;
and if the work is delicate, so that the work is seen to be faded, for it is a subtle and small work, then take hold of the needle at the root of the hair and make it penetrate deeply until you see it emerge from its natural place
Then draw out the hair until above the chase, and keep the chase until there is one or two or three or more.
Then draw out your hand as long as the hair veins outwards to the tip of the chase in the palm with the natural hair growth
And if the chase is treated and the hair does not prick with it, if you draw the chase to the end as you have ordered, until the chase vein appears through and you see it by the vision of the oil;
Then draw the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair returns to its place and the wound heals atop;
And if the hair is little, if accompany one long hair of the natural kind, and either remove it with that or leave it, as long as it is elongated and then let it go.
From the putrefaction of the oil. When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the inflammation comes to the head, if there are two methods:
When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the inflammation comes to the head, if there are two methods: the one natural, and the other unnatural.
And there follows by consequence of wound, or of burn or cautery, and similar things.
And the way of working in it is that you make that suture there, dry the wounds, put in lint wads, and keep it until it is healed
and do not use anything but dry and restrictive things in the treatment of it. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but give soft things, such as fennel. And the rose of the aquilegia or altea and linseed seeds be boiled, and aquilon oil melted in none of the oils, and it covers a cloth, and the patient is cured of this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you must guard it so that it does not harden like before;
These works that we have mentioned are not for other purposes than for this disease, that they do not return like before.
This disease which is often called "axacrati", is natural and sudden.
The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things.
And the way of the work in this case is that if you take an awl, because it has two threads, and the thread is in the flesh, and it makes the liquid blood come out as much as it wants, so that the thread of the vein breaks in two pieces of the flesh.
Then is the cauldron upon the fire with all the needles, and the bowl has a wide lip. And if the sponge returns to its place as it should, that is good.
If not, take the forceps and put them into the sponge, and tear the sponge, and make two incisions through the sponge; or cut through the sponge itself
And make two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you made, and make one angle so that when they are put together, the figure is as if it were the letter that has not “two knees.”
Then break the cauldron, according to the quantity of bones that are left and those that are detached, of that which surrounds the sponge, and then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen;
Then comes the treatment of what we have said of soft medicines and bandages, as long as it is sane.
And if the disease comes from a wound or swelling or cautery, if you must make a full incision to remove the hair from the paper, and do as it is above mentioned. Then take away between two fingers of a bandage, as I have said before.
Then take away between two fingers of a bandage, as I have said before. and you must make the work according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the physicians know best how to make it return to its natural shape
and the patient himself, according to what is convenient in various situations
When this scab appears at home in a part as thin as the beard of a man, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, if you must, then drink the point of a rasp from the tip of your thumb and leave it in its place.
and keep it as tight as possible, as much as you can without making them too tight or too loose, so that the patient does not suffer from excessive pressure and does not vomit the oil
and your incision, which you have made, being as gentle as possible, so that the patient’s limb returns to its natural shape
and is completely healed, and never again does any watery or dirty oil remain, and lift it with sweet water and vinegar.
Then put between the paper and oil a wick of linen, and put on the oil wool felt in abundance. And afterwards let the third part be dressed with a bandage and other soft things until it is healed.
The nails are two ways: One is nervous and seems like iron two nails, and another which is not nervous, but seems like pale moisture frozen, that when it is touched with iron and is cooked in the pan, as many scratches appear as if it did not exist
And both seem to begin towards the great marrow, and cross each other so that they cover the whole cavity and the light and the movement of the oil
And if the patient places his head in his throat, then hold the eyes; and hold the tongue at your hand, then grasp the jaw as if it were pierced by a small double, and stretch it upwards. then take a needle, and put in hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of a bull, and tighten firmly. and double the point of the needle a little and fix it well in the jaw, and pierce with the needle and tie the jaw with a thread and stretch it upwards, and press all around the jaw with your fingers that support the cheek and the beard until the swelling subsides, and leave the natural discharge or saliva, if during the incision there is no discharge of tears usually
And never has the nail extended only at the cuticle, but as we have said. Then the swelling has spread over the whole nail bed as we have mentioned before.
Keep the nail bed from touching the tough skin and break it, and do not notice the nail;
Then after the incision, pour on a some broth of broth onto the wound and sprinkle with lye, and leave it until the other evening. Then keep the wound clean as long as it is healing.</start_of_turn>
If the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push out the needle, and the thread will not go in, many times this semblance of a nail is cured by medicine;
And they grow as I have said in the division; and if you see them covered, if you oil the patient, and take the gentler sponge according to this form. And withdraw the hair gently, and if you see that it is blunt and the root is pressed, if you distill from your mouth into the oil of coriander, make of alum and saffron and it will bruise, and stamp the oil until the other side is reached.
If nothing opposes you, if like an abscess you have opened, then milk, and first close the wound thoroughly while it is healthy, and afterwards resume the work as before, while it is healthy.
Then repeat the work as before according to this same method until it is fully healed
And if at night there appears flesh in the oil by great suffering, if you suspend it on the sponge, and cut off a part and not the whole, that tears of tears do not arise;
Then distill in the red coliere which is made of litharge.
Then there is no other creature in the world that is born without some red mark, and covers the navel and binds on the papers and tightens against the fire, and appears like a red rose of bulrushes.
and if the patient puts his head in his sound, then he will vomit the bile, and all that evil that has a convenient colour for this, and the support has force.
then collect the first evil, and go collecting to the end, and keep only that which will not burn the oil at the work;
and if the incision of the spleen which we have said concerning the incision of the vein and has little force so that one can hold the bone loose, as it is shown after this chapter
And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is closed, if you use oil of rue or you distill collyrium rouge and similar corrosive medicines, put upon the oil a bandage of cotton wool with yolk of egg, so that it is secured against infection.
If nothing remains and the wound is filled with pus, and you doubt the infection, if you leave the oil and treat the infection with calming things that bring relief to the infection.
Then return to your work when it is healed, and when the flesh is well joined in the oil by this appearance.
However, you must know that you should feed the cure with a weak oil from the natural way. and from the way of an accident, in the work of iron;
And do not move your hand in any of these works until you see that the limb is suffering from that work.
The wounds are red veins that are covered with oil, and they tolerate the gaze of the patient and expand the oil all day long.
Therefore, the first thing you must look at is if the limb is stiff, for it is strong, and there is no other disease that is forceful except stiffness therefore hold it firm partially:
instructs the patient to put his head in its place, then suspend the veins all around according to his wisdom, and be double sure:
And be doubled in degrees by degrees in a circle according to this form:
then hold the veins firmly, and allow the blood to flow for some time afterwards, until you see the forceful veins removed from the place
and keep that you do not stain the place with spatulas, and do this work at midday in the sunlight, and be warm-hearted in your work if you do not cope for the veins only;
And when you have done this, if you distill in the green and red oil of the coliers, it will corrupt that which remains doubtful.
And if you do not have coliers enough for this hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things that will calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it untouched until the pain is eased and is reassured after the cautery is complete; then begin again according to this manner until you are healed.</start_of_turn>
This is the form of forces:
The moisture if they call "arissati" is a fistula.</start_of_turn>
When you cure it by cautery and by strong and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, if there is any in the wound that you do on the afterburn, then you must measure it there and remove all the moisture, until the bone is exposed.</start_of_turn
And when the bone is exposed, you will see the corruption and blackness, if the root has all the power to hold it in place.
And it is called "spleneous shoulder", and is made with ivory at the head of the shoulder, and pointed as with a file as when it is in this form:
And put on the bone that is corrupt, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand until you feel that the corruption is fixed
And do it only once, then restore the limb of exiccative medicine
If the limb is bruised, and there is no bleeding, and the bone is fractured, and remains immobile for forty days, and does not heal and is not removed, and other evils do not occur, then it is considered to be healed;
If not, if there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula to the opening of the wound following this fashion: If not, if there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula to the opening of the wound following this fashion: uncover the bone a second time by means of iron and sharp drugs; and when you have uncovered it take hold of it as described above, and let the iron be at an angle of three, and the fistula be reduced to its root as much as you can see in this case.
Then put it on the bone without blood, and wipe your hand with oil; then draw the whole thing until it breaks the bone and the patient feels it through this that it has reached its root if it holds his hand on his wound
and when the wound is closed with dry drugs, as I have taught you, and when the flesh has healed and become tough again, if there is still matter in the wound; If it is less burdensome for the patient.
When the eye is open all the time, and there is no danger of disturbing the eye, no weakening, if you can bind the patient;
then do the same, then put on bandages or a dressing in a clockwise direction, then put on oil which is made from acaice and aloe and incense and balsam, and then strain the oil, and put on a bandage and a cloth;
and keep the cloth in place if you take cloth enough soft, and double fold in III, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has in its middle
then strain by the support of a hard bandage forms, and start the dressing in a clockwise direction again
Then let the wound discharge its pus and leave the oil strained out during the day and night, and if it is linked to the wound, if you must remove it, do so cautiously.
Then let the wound discharge its pus after the day and the night, and if you see the oil returning, it is well.</start_of_turn>
Otherwise.</start_of_turn> if it starts to swell again and the patches and the limb and the dressings remain until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Dou derrompement de toile uvee. When a dislocation comes to light in the armpit, then open it up, and bring forth sponges as if there were grains of resin, and it is expected to see.</start_of_turn
then if you see it covered, the work is just as if you had swallowed a needle at the root of the limb until below, then there is another needle or there is double thread in the flesh.</start_of_turn And let the fire burn, and leave the first needle according to its position.
Then take hold of the loop of thread with two fingers and grasp a part of the iris towards the outside, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put on linseed oil soaked in egg yolk;
And leave it until the thread has gone through the iris, then cure the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed
And never restrain the wound by the tough part of the iris until it is healed.
And if the eye is very swollen, if the pupil becomes pale which comes from the thick oil, correct the moisture of the serum and bring down the swelling, and between these two things.
Then extract it while it is whole.
The disease called "alcunnati" is not fierce but is like an oily bow that resembles descending water, and it is not simply water.
And as for the appearance of the disease, if you make the patient sit on a chair, place his body upright, then take hold of his head with your two hands, and move it until you see the bow descend towards his eyes Then extract it while it is whole.
And if it does not descend after that, extract it with force, as if it were water, and if the bow does not appear as we have said.
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and place it on the horny corn [of the eye] along with the conjunctiva and the cornea, as long as the eye is closed.
And when it [the eye] comes out, if you distill it in hot oil mixed with honey, or in vinegar or fenugreek boiled with honey, then it should be cured by another remedy until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
From the oil bowl. We have seen similar things in the division [of the eye], and that which must be known.</start_of_turn if in the work according to the health.</start_of_turn
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, without sunlight, and apply pure oil and tighten the bandage strongly.</start_of_turn
Then put the palm of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called the “almagda,” or in your left hand if the eyes are right.
Then put the tip of the instrument behind the crown by the thickness of a hair in that which there is the greatest amount of oil, then grasp the instrument which is called the “almagda” firmly, and pull your hand until it breaks through the oil, and feel that the “almagda” has come to the empty thing
And know that the measure of the “almagda” should be at the level of the measure of the space from the armpit to the end of the shoulder And this is the crown of oil.
If you see the bone in that membrane because of the corniness of the canvas, and since put the instrument until it reaches the root or the liquid is there, then press out the marrow through another way.</start_of_turn>
If he feels the pain increasing now, if he sees the patient in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest a little, and when the liquid returns through the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and high does not go up, if it is strained too much around your hand and your hand, then take an almond lightly around your thumb and index finger.</start_of_turn
And then put back in the liquid a little bit of gum arabic, and remove from that the oil from the wound.</start_of_turn Then put by force the oil-soaked bandage or cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of eggs, and tie with the healthy oil.</start_of_turn
Yes, and those who are of our kind, put on common broth with plenty of eggs.</start_of_turn
And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because there are too many hair roots, since there are parts of the body which have too tightly closed the hairs, it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called the «alberit», which is like this:
And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it shallow, then put an almond there, as we have said.</start_of_turn
And at the end of the work appears to the patient I the sleeper coming, lying on his back in the dark;
And let him be taken from all movements, and hold his legs firm, and do not move his head forward or backward, or to the left or right, and keep him still according to his position until three days have passed.
Then take him out of this house into the same darkness, uncover his eyes, and let him see nothing, and then put him back in his bed until seven days have passed
And do not forget that you must do this in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but let him eat, for in this way the pain will depart immediately.
When the pulse comes again, that you take away the oil before the seventh day, and bring in what will soothe the abscess
And when it is appeased, if you remove the vein and put on its face a little irillet to cover any opening, and keep it in that dark dwelling.
And then go out of the house and go away, and turn into his case;
and let the socks be taken away by no disciple in this case. And one came to us from Yrach who told us that in his peace he saw a great worm which appeared to drink water, but we never saw anything like it in our land, neither did we read about it in the books of the ancients and it is a new thing to us
And these are the signs of the shapes of an almagd, for those who do not know them will not recognize them
And let them be from the start in order: And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like a bow.</start_of_turn>
And never at any time do new or old hairs grow without various itching, from which there are some that seem like scorpions with teeth at the root of the hair.
And if there are such or if there is hair entangled with blood-stained pus, and if there is hair of the color of bone. In which case, since these hairs are bloody and do not prick, it is necessary that you hold the patient between your hands and expose them to the sun;
In which case, since these hairs are bloody and do not prick, it is necessary that you hold the patient between your hands and expose them to the sun; covering his nose and mouth, and spitting on those hairs, and pulling them out forcefully Then hold in place with the thumb what is beneath the skin of the joint until you are sure that the hair is entirely gone
And if nothing remains, if the opening has too much subtle tremor, if nothing settles; if it does not stay, or if an abscess bursts, or if the blood clots, as it should.</start_of_turn>
if it is malignant pus, hasten and cauterize until it is dry and all the filth is gone, then throw or take out the bad blood or urine, easily and with pain or wine.</start_of_turn If it does not yield, and moisture comes up to the palate, urinate while sane.</start_of_turn
and if moisture does not go away as it should, urinate while it has pus in the bones above, because the subtle tremor comes from there.</start_of_turn>
When you must pull out a hair by its root, take a large loop of thread and pass it under the nail, and keep your hands steady, without leaving any space between the nails. And put the patient’s hand over the hair by the root at the root of the nail, and grasp it firmly until it comes out through the nail hole in the mouth
And many times do the children make this mistake, and it is a light matter for him who sees it done;
Then take the part that comes by the nail in one hand, and the other part that comes by the mouth in the other hand, and grasp them one after the other while holding them close to us.
Do this until you are sure that the nails have not been damaged, then pull out the hair, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and then reset the nail in its place as before
Fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char.
Do so for three days or more, until the oozing has corroded all that remains of the flesh. Then put in or remove a layer of wax for several days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them accordingly.
This is the form of the instrument for extracting the head, in which we distill oils and medicines or not.</start_of_turn>
And be of silver or gold, like a wide lamp, if like a chain, and guide it thus.</start_of_turn
And if you see, make a closed chain, and let the instrument be flat for purging the head.</start_of_turn
And he has one hand clenched at the shoulder to hold it when we burn oil or no liquid.
From the shoulder joint downwards on the neck.
Many times there arises at the shoulder no disease which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large at will, until it is seen to be something.
and therefore you must immediately support the limb at the beginning, and break the bone, then put out the fire or the burning medicine
and if you wait too long to support it when it is large, if you take warning that it is hard, of dark color, of poor sense:
you must not touch it with iron for it is an inflamed abscess, for when it is supported even once, there comes great harm to the patient
If the swelling is soft to the touch, not of a dark hue, and you can see that it can be completely covered, if the patient vomits and groans in fear, and cures the limb of dry and restraining things.
Make this until you know that they have not corrupted that hair, then bring the needle, wipe the blood, and moisten the needle in Egyptian fashion, and put it back in place as before; do this for three days or more, until the scab has corroded all that is remaining of the hair; and then put in or remove a cauterizing sponge for a few days until it is healed, and if there is need for calming medicines, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which we distill oils and medicines or the like.
It is therefore necessary that this should not happen at all, if you see that the wound is fresh with all its blood; and immediately support both limbs at a brace, then treat until it is healed;
if the limbs are already dislocated from one side to the other, if you must support all the parts of their joints until they bleed, then reassemble the limbs at a brace, and strain, and sprinkle with dragon’s blood powder and incense powder And place upon the wound a piece of gauze or another dressing that adheres, and leave it until it oozes by itself, then cure it of inflammation when it is healed.
When the dislocation is thus set, if you rejoin the pieces, or by needles, as we have said in the treatment of wounds of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you before.
of the separation of the layers of the skin.
The hands often have within them the bones of the forearm split in two, like grains of wheat, minor and greater;
therefore you must turn the forearm, and make incisions above each bone, and grasp and fracture the parts apart
Then use the broth after the incision of the carbuncle, until the wound is closed;
Then loosen the dressing and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Many times it happens on the gums where garlic has been placed, which the old people call "albulus".</start_of_turn
if you hold it firmly as it should be, and grasp the root, and leave the swelling or blood to escape;
then put out the broth of the carbuncle, or other astringent and drying powders.</start_of_turn>
and if it comes back after the incision, and happens many times, if the root grasps it a second time, and cauterize it.</start_of_turn> If it does not return naturally after the cautery.
Never are they assembled at the head of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, shields which are useful and rough Never are the teeth black and yellow and soft, until the corruption comes to the gum, and they are biting;
If you can make the patient sit between your hands, and his head is steady, and open the teeth or the shields until there is nothing left to do and so make blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other spots, until they are wiped off
And if the bone that is at the first root is sound, it is well; if it is not sound, if it recurs again at the second joint and the third, until you have all healed;
and the teeth that have mixed with various forms of instruments because of what it shows in the work, for indeed those that remove them from between the teeth have other shapes than those that are between the teeth and these shapes and others will appear to you.
You must know that when you treat the tooth from its pain, you must do it slowly and cautiously, for it must not make me do more harm because it is a soft substance, therefore we have no excuse for making it bleed
Therefore, when the patient is constrained to endure, if you are certain that they will endure. Many times the patient experiences pain, whether it be sudden or lasting, and makes the limb tremble. and although it does not always depart with the pain, as long as the illness persists, for we have already made it suffer enough;
when you are quite certain that the pain is departing, if you are able, escort the limb at all times. Spread it out strongly to protect the limb from all sides.
then put your hand on their shoulder or grasp the hair at the root and pull it out slightly, until it is well loosened, and then grasp it firmly again and if the patient’s limb hangs between your thighs, hold it firmly so that it does not move.
After that, draw the tooth straight out towards the front; and if it does not come out immediately, take none of these instruments and hold it loosely in the cheek; and move it as you did before.
And if the swelling is perceived and mixed, if you cover it with cloths, the wound or the hole will be open. and if the subtle strain has teeth, do not break them during the straining.</start_of_turn>
and you must say softly over the joint by pulling out the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Take care that you do not break it, and leave some, and return to the patient by the greatest pain of the first.</start_of_turn>
Be aware that you should not do this like the ignorant people, who by their haste and boldness break the limb every time and bring about nothing but what we have told you.</start_of_turn
but they often bring about no remedy for the great disease by the roots that remain, or for the limb that is broken, as we have often said.</start_of_turn
And when the wound is dressed, if you bathe the limb with wine or oil and wool,
if blood comes out, as it often does, if you apply wine or oil and wool to the wound,
then cauterize it.
The shapes of instruments, when they are mute at first, should have long points and broad handles, so that they do not break when you are drawing out the tooth.
These are the shapes: And be of great size if they do not bend when drawing, and be of fine iron well made, and be toothed so that they may hold firmly.</start_of_turn>
of the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn> When the root is stubborn when you are pulling it out, if you must put out the moist cotton swab in butter I or II, as long as the wound is bleeding, because that stops the pangs which are called “algophry,” for in this case the head of the shoulder seems like a beak of a sparrow
And let the incisions be made thus as with a file, and thus is the shape:
If the roots do not suffice to hold all these tensions, if you must uncover the marrow throughout the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", namely a palatine, for this is its form.
And be strong and wide so that it does not break me, and if the root bursts through this, that is good.
If not, if you help with all your tools, so that the shapes come afterwards:
And if you use this instrument which has two rains, for this is its form And other instruments which are before the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the shape:
And let these instruments be strong that they cannot break, and nails as thick as the nails of dense people And like other instruments that are not counted here;
And thus his masters know by themselves what instrument to choose, according to what his works and his disease show, for there are many diseases where the former did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of things; and if it breaks not from bone or from any other part, or if it hangs, if you search for instruments that you should choose, as I have said, and that you help with gestures, so that this is the shape:
And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, that it escapes not, but that you can hold and restrain.
Then restore the limb of medicine that is suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if the wound has all these instruments:
When the tooth appears does not match the natural curve of the jaw, and the shape is deformed, and even in women of childbearing age, if you must know that if you do not remove it when the tooth is loose, and it is not straight, you cannot heal it or support it
Therefore, remove the bone; And if it is with the tooth, take this instrument which has a small beak, and is like a pin, and be of iron without a groove in front:
And when the tooth persists in the gums and hands are clasped for a long time due to the duration of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, if it appears, it can be limed, if you are using a file similar to this one which has the same shape.</start_of_turn>
And it is thus that we make needles as well.
And thus we hold the teeth firmly in place with our thumbs and index fingers, so that they do not move until they bleed
Then the limb at the end has no callous at all, and if it is too deep and bites the tongue, if you must keep the biting even until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or impede speech
When the front tooth is loosened, by percussion or by pressure, and the patient cannot press on what hurts except that it bleeds, and you must cure them with restrictive medicines, that does not work;
if you must restrain them with gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and rusts, but the pain does not go away
And let the hair be neither too thick nor too thin, in accordance with the quantity of space between the teeth.
And if you see the teeth leaning towards each other, if you take hold of the hair and double it between the two teeth that are closest together, then put the nails between the teeth next to each other until you see it is straight once more on the other side. Then repeat the covering until you reach the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cautiously, until it does not move anymore.
And let the suture be at the root of the tooth if it cannot escape
Then grasp the nails with pliers, assemble them and place them between the tooth and the tongue, and keep them in place so that the tongue does not bleed
Then he must leave it closed as much as he can, and if it slips, or if the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread.
if it should remain and hold it closed, and that is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two front teeth, and the two back teeth, as you see.
And when the tooth aches, if we put it back in its place, fresh and new, as we have said
and there is no other thing that should intervene except for sage and balsam, and never make it the shape of a chipped tooth, and put it back in its place where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and it will remain closed for a long time
Under no circumstances is this tongue or nature that comes from the nose, that we are born without. or by accident of a deep wound.
and the work is such that you must offer the patient the mouth of the sick person, and put your head in his throat, and hold the tongue;
then grasp the large nerve, until the tongue is detached from its seat, and if there is any delay or resistance, it is a sign of wound healing, if the ligature and the large nerve are loosened.
and take care that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that comes from the nose;
and when you have done this, if you lift the pale and easy or cold blood, then put the tongue back gently with a little tension;
And the patient complains that at night his limb is stiff, so that he cannot rest.
When blood comes out, if it brings forth a clot, take out the clot immediately. And if it does not go away, burn it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this purpose then treat it with other treatments until it is healed
and if you see pus of a color like blood or black or hard, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an abscess
and if it is declining with moisture, if there is moisture in it, if it is vomiting, and there is a visible swelling, and it delivers from both parts; If it does not go naturally into its place, if put on a broken glass vessel until it is stained, then return to its place as long as you have treated everything else.
Then lift the limb easily and cautiously, and treat it of other ailments until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
From the throat apostemes. Never comes from the throat lice which are called "godath," and they are properly two almonds; and when you treat them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, beware.</start_of_turn
If it is a tough abscess of small size and color, do not touch it with iron.</start_of_turn>
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, even because of the discharge of blood.</start_of_turn But leave it be until it is dead, and when it is so, you must take it away, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of pale color and the root is flexible, if the instrument has appeared to cover it, but look first whether the abscess has calmed and is quiet.</start_of_turn>
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and that his arms be in their normal position, and cover his mouth and grasp his thumbs between his hands, and press the tongue down to the instrument, as it should be formed.</start_of_turn
And be of silver or of gold as subtle as a needle.</start_of_turn
Can you press the tongue down to the instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the sponge and press it into the pus, and pull it out more than you wish.</start_of_turn
And take no thread from the cloth with, then place the cap over the instrument, for this is the form, that seems like one force. And behold, the head of the sufferer is bent, one place with the other, and is very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have only a pair of tongs, know that this is the form: Or be split from one side and from the other side name;
And when you have closed one of the wounds, if you close the other in the same manner, and afterwards make an incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and remove the blood which comes out, if you gargle the patient with hot water, or there are blood clots which are cooked, or purples of mistletoe, and similar things, until the wound is clean Then let the cure be until it is healed;
Then let the cure be until it is healed; and never in the throat are there other abscesses born except for the two almonds, if the nails are thus left with the two almonds even.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the throat, namely one abscess of small size
and had her well closed throughout the throat, so that she could neither breathe through the nose nor drink or eat, and died if she fainted in that state for even a moment or two
And the abscess was so big that it had forced two stones out of its place twice.
I had done so much, and lay in one place, and the fire went out, and brought out large pieces of charcoal; and brought out a great portion of blood
Then pull out the other part through the other hole, and hold the mouth and press the tongue.
After placing the ointment on these abscesses, and closing a part, let only a little blood remain; and as soon as the blood vessel of the throat was loosened, and when she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop bleeding from this abscess for a long time
and the abscesses reappeared in their place, filling the whole body as I had vomited violently, until it brought up large pieces of matter
therefore I grasped it and cauterized it inside the throat: and like that I went away without saying anything more.
And I depart from these parts, and only God knows what becomes of me after.
De l’uve.
When the limb hangs downwards, and it flees and is elongated, if it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is thick and round, it is called "uve".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit me, and you see that the hair around the wound is quiet, and it is subtle, so you must cover it over
and that which is round and gathered and is not long and it is bloody or dark-brown or black, so you must avoid the incision of the flesh For there is great danger for the patient.</start_of_turn>
You must therefore, when you see it, following the manner I have said, from its source and its length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument mentioned above. Then apply the ointment to the eye, and move it away, and hold it for two instruments as I have said concerning the incision of the two almonds.</start_of_turn>
And must ensure that you do not cover more than the excess which is beyond the natural limit.</start_of_turn
because if you cover more, if he groans with his voice and his throat;
and afterwards the incision, use what we have said concerning the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the patient has fear of covering, it must be known that you must use an engine for the cautery in the sense of fear.
The manner of cautery must be gentle and not severe And it is that the patient puts his head in tone, and then he presses the tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned or the chapter of cautery, and grasps with live chaff, if it is neither too thick nor too clear. and with the use of this instrument, thus it is formed:
Or he has a beard or one puts the medicine, as with the nails of a spoon, and puts the instrument over the wound
and the patient should be calm on his chest, so that saliva and mucus come out of his mouth from the medicine, if it does not go down to the throat, and he sneezes.
then keep your hand over the medicine and press it on the wound, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it callous and the bites of the medicine are appeased.
And if you see it, take hold and encircle it with any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and hold the instrument to its utmost extent within the joint above, until the cotton adheres to the limb.
Do it often, until the burnings are perfect, then leave it dry, and cut after three days or five.
And if you must repeat the burnings from the medicine, when you repeat it, and after the burnings hold the eye well covered with cotton wool, and moisten what is around the medicine;
And let the cold water be raised, and be cured of gargles as long as it is well.</start_of_turn>
This treatment is safer than incision, for the cautery.
This treatment is safer than incision, for the cautery. If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take chamomile, rue, origanum, camomile, ivy, and cloves, mix them all or some of them in a pot, put some oil in it, and boil.
and the pot should be well greased with strong earth, and in the pot has the instrument that is to be cauterized according to this manner: And it can be of silver or gold, and the one of the bones is pricked in the patient’s mouth until the vapor reaches the eye by the smoke, until the eye is numbed.
And repeat this often, until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the emergence of the cautery, for many things happen; And do not make me do this for anything but the inclination of the afterburn.
And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and put inside his head a piece of egg, so that the patient does not feel too much heat; because the egg-shell does not make the vapor grow in the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether
Many times it has happened to me at the throat of bone or fish spine, or nothing at all;
Therefore I advise you to do what you see, and press the tongue towards the sun with all the instruments, so that you can see the thing clearly
and what is not seen by me and is returned to the throat, I advise you to make the patient vomit immediately so that the meat is cooked in the stomach By chance, if this thing is vomited out whole;
or the patient swallows down a sponge, or a piece of rag, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then transfix it; and when it comes out whole, if it is vomited, and then draw out the thread
and if it does not come out of its own, take an instrument of pliers as in this fashion:
and let the instrument be curved at the head if it can enter more easily through the throat, and keep the head lifted; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, that it does not bleed, do not break the bone inside
And the muscle is worth that the patient holds the instrument, because if it is moved or the thing is loose; if the thing falls down, or if it is forced strongly with all the instrument equally, as long as it is strong.</start_of_turn>
And let the instrument curve at the head if it can enter more easily through the throat, with the head raised up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, for all will pass over it, do not push the bone inwards; and must it be known that the patient has held the instrument, for it is either that the thing is loose or that it is crooked; if the tongue swells, or if it is forced with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced. From the absence of the throat.
Never is medicine without blood, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines.</start_of_turn> and when this does not help, then look at the patient’s throat in the sunlight, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.</start_of_turn
And if you see the armpit, if the wound has even a small lump, or if you suspect that there are subtle tensions that are worth as much.
And if that is not the case, take a pinch of caine and put it in the patient's throat, then press or pinch the caine lightly until it is burned, and do this often. And if the patient groans with acute pain all over
then take full water to see if it is cold, and cover the mouth, and vomit in the direction of swallowing, and move the hand often.</start_of_turn And if you touch it without feeling pain, even if it aches.
And if it does not ache as we have said, if you suspect the patient is affected with madness, with the instrument which I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
do it often, for it will make sense to target
And the way of fumigation is that you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces, and that you cover the area with a gauze cloth about a mile wide, and in that hole you make the hole of the instrument
then I pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the tip of the cannula in his mouth, closes his mouth so that the smoke does not go out, but comes out only through the nose
And now the patient cries out, and if she does not desist, we must fumigate her repeatedly.
and she drinks foul and dirty things, and does not drink water;
therefore she must be forced to vomit by this treatment.</start_of_turn>
And the form of the instrument with which we treat the patient, if it is seen, is like a pair of tongs with teeth to enter the throat.</start_of_turn it has the shape of a goose beak, and has the roughness of lime, so that whatever she grasps, she cannot let go.</start_of_turn
The wounds of an abscess are like those which are remembered to come after one thing and another in this book, and are diverse in perforation and size.
and there are two ways in which one is like the other, and the other from moisture.
And thus if it is for the limbs or if they are at the bone.
for the swelling at the head is different from that at the root, and the swelling at the bone is different from that which comes at the joints, and the nails have their own judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling subsides according to its course;
if there are some which must be pierced when hardened, and do not subside naturally according to their course, like abscesses which are between joints
for when swelling comes from the joints, and it is left as it is until it is bruised, by chance if the bone and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because of this there is contraction in that limb.
or if the abscess is between the principal limb, and you delay the perforation until it is measured, it will be done to the principal limb;
When the fire is applied at the root, if it is withdrawn before it has died down, it will be useless.
And I advise you only that you pierce with the fire only when the digestion is complete, for the one that is withdrawn from the root must not be pricked, but must remain along its course, and there will be no fistula formed and will not heal in great measure
I advise you that you should withdraw the fire from the incision when the pain has subsided, the swelling has gone down, the fever has receded, the pain and redness have ceased, and there is no debate or discomfort about the progress of the incision or other signs
and that you hold the incision or more stable according to the progress of the abscess, and where there is movement of the bone.
Or let the wound be made on a long limb, and if the edges of the wound are with hands or pieces, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and all be even, or there is no swelling. In these cases, according to the limb itself.
And when the opening is in the flesh, if it is confirmed during digestion as we have said
For if you prick before this, if it runs along the limb from it, and there is plenty of pus; and by chance toughen the flesh and deepen from it.
And if there is no wound that is perceived according to the large wound, according to what the limb has to bear.
So must you bring many small wounds, small incisions. and in great incisions, great wounds, and many cuts according to the greatness of the abscess.
and if there are such abscesses or it must be feared that the limb will be deformed, and covered; When the eye has become swollen like a drooping drape, and is softened, if you wish, you can do the same as for bubbles.
and if there are those that are split into three angles, and those that can be grasped like the fennel flower, like abscesses of grapes;
and if there are those for which you make a round the size of a plum, and other sizes and similar things.
Those who have no head, if like a superficial abscess, you must simply pierce them
and when the abscess is large, and it has caused great swelling, and you pierce it, do not remove all the swelling at once, but only a part of it. Then I stamp the abscess up to the other ear, and then do nothing further. Do this many times with great force, until the swelling is completely gone
Even if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a young boy, or an old man decrepit. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if it is small, look to see if the abscess has come out of the wound and if it is a large wound, mix together lint or old cotton and if there is a great abscess and there is much pus, you must bite in the cheek with a cloth so that one covers the other
If you have cauterized in the abscess a part of raw leather, and you have shut it in the flesh, you must know that you must fill it up with much cotton or coarse thread of flax towards moisture, and keep it there until the third part of the joint.
Then the bone, and cure the swelling until it is healed.
And if blood should discharge from your work, order cold water and ease, and moisten the bandage, and draw out the offending part many times.
And if the discharge of blood persists, mix with government and cure, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is too late, and the wound or abscess is moist nervous, if you can, put on a bandage and moist cloths soaked in wine and oil
and if it is late, and the wound is fleshy, if you can, put on moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil, until the third part of the joint, as we have said
And then remove the abscess, drain it, and cure it if possible, until it is healed.
It is known throughout that it is successful in treating abscesses:
as I have said before, you must alert before treating abscesses, and thus it will be successful.
Or indeed, from the chief comes a little abscess, and it is a custom of us that it is in silks, like the blossoming of a hyacinth, and there is resemblance in it.
There are some that have fat and those that have moisture just like pus;
and if there are some that are tough and hard at the root, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it
And concerning the work of the size, if you expect with all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes afterwards, what thing does it contain?
For if it contains moisture, if you make it through with long doubs.
When the moisture is drained, if you leave the peel that contains that moisture, it will return as before
Then plunge cotton into the Egyptian eye, if it is present. If it is not there, in water and oil, and apply the bandage, and leave it until the other side is healed. And this will correct what is delayed due to pain
And thus repeat the cotton, as before, the second time, and the third, until you are certain that it does not remain painful;
Then cure the wound of the eye when it is convenient, until it is healed
And if the abscess persists without fat, if it is cut according to this form, for a long time and let your sponges flow, and the pus from all parts, and put all your cure to drain towards the navel or where it is placed
If the artery opposes you, do as I have said afterwards.
And do the same with the fistula if it is perforated, and cut and cure as I have told you before
And the size of the perforated abscess and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are matters of blood. If there is no swelling or moisture in these abscesses or swellings, and if they do not yield to pressure from an old woman’s hand, I cauterize or extract them.
I find the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and cannot burst it And if no blood flows from it, we must make a wound as deep as a stone
In other abscesses of the vein or bone, because these things come from the head and root of the ear, they burst immediately if they are not opened from the first day of their existence, for fear of bursting the belly
And the treatment is as he commands.
And if a swelling appears in the armpit, near the armpit and the incision of the head, as we have said; and the appearance of these swellings is many.
And if any swelling is properly within its sheath, if it does not move and is sutured at the root, as we have said; And the signs of these swellings are many
And the signs of these swellings are many In such a case as this, where you see a good arrangement of bones at the touch, and it is similar in color to bone, and is soft from one side and does not bleed from the artery or vein, nor is it deep; if you must break it, you must do so from below, and burn the soft part, and elevate the two levers of the forearm as we have mentioned in the apostemes of the head; and hold the thumb and index finger still so that you do not damage the nerve or vein, and do not cause swelling or bruising, except for the hand itself, and do not raise it too high before you have closed.
in those where you see a good position at the touch, and is similar in color to coral, and moves only from the swelling part and not from the head or the artery or the vein, and is not deep
if it can be grasped by the nails and the swelling part is scorched, and if two fingers of the hand are placed as we have said in the incisions of the head;
And the way to proceed is thus: do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not let the splinter or the nails escape, but keep the hands steady and do not speak too much, for you must not cover anything that you are not to cover.
If you cover the vein or the artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put in the wound a bit of vitriol broken or some powders that remain inside, and constrain the wound; leave it until the spasms are calmed and the wound is softened, and then begin to move.
And when the thing is stained, if you return to your work until you have completed it;
then you must know that you must indicate that there are no small scabs, that you must cope and bind them
And if there is in the root of the scrophule a great swelling, if it will not suffice to cope only with that scrophule at its root, but bind with a strong double thread and leave it in its place, as required.
Then apply the wound closure of white cotton steeped in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
if you understand to cover the root of the [disease] and drain away the pus, and close it as we have said.</start_of_turn> Those scrofulas which keep swelling, pierce them or they will die; and pierce them as before said, according to the circumstances, then mix with oil and similar things, so that it destroys what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, if the oil cure has taken hold of the char, as long as it is sane.</start_of_turn
Those scrofulas which keep swelling, pierce them or they will die; and pierce them as before said, according to the circumstances, then mix with oil and similar things, so that it destroys what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, if the oil cure has taken hold of the char, as long as it is sane.</start_of_turn Those scrofulae which maintain excessive swelling, pierce them or they will open and die
and pierce like the one mentioned before, depending on the case, and mix sponges with ointment and similar things, so that it may cleanse what is remaining of corruption and when the wound is well cleansed, if the ointment cure is nourishing, as long as it is sound
The old people spoke and told of the size of the gorge; but I have never seen in our land anyone who has done it, and it is written in their words.
As for those who are squinting, it is necessary that the gullet which is called the epiglottis be cut away; and this does not help, for all the veins and the blood vessels of the patient are at those which have been cauterized in the mouth, or in the throat or in the armpits.
It is necessary therefore, when our wounds are about to burst the epiglottis, to cut them from three circles or four, a small incision through two circles or by the amount of the incision on the surface, not through the cartilage; and if it is necessary to join the epiglottis with the section of the epiglottis that there is no char, and the blood vessels are long enough.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore, when we cut the epiglottis, to cut from three circles or four a small cut through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the cartilage;
And thus if it is necessary to break the cartilage at the epiglottis, there is no char [foreign body] there, and the vessel is long enough.
And if the master is doubtful, then it is right to extend the skin of the throat to its utmost extent, then cut through the skin as far as the chin; And evacuate the blood vessels, if you see nothing else, and then close the wound as we have said.
It is shown by the section of the voice that the leap would jump out by the broken bone, and by the absence of voice;
And leave the wound open for a piece.
When the hour has passed since the dislocation, if there is still doubt about the strangulation, join together the two levers of the wound of the chin, and bind them all together so that the cartilage is held in place;
Then administer medicines that cause the formation of pus, as long as they are safe.
Therefore close the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe; and he breathes through the wound; and thus is preserved from death; and for this reason the ancients command that the old man leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they command that the wound be closed and healed, until it is healed; and I shall tell you what I have seen. Therefore keep the epiglottis closed for this reason that the patient does not breathe through the wound, and he is saved from death; and is kept alive.</start_of_turn>
And for this reason they command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they command to suture the wound and cure, until it is cured.</start_of_turn
And I will tell you what I have seen.</start_of_turn I saw that a lady had taken a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of her windpipe;
And I fled called for help, and found her just like death.
I hurried, and closed the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and the lady did not feel any pain, and returned to her normal state; for in the handling of the epiglottis, I did not find any fear
I hurried, and bound up the wound, and cured it until it healed completely.
and did not leave the patient without speaking to her, and returned afterwards to her usual state
because I know that in the case of a strangulation of the epiglottis, I have no fear
This swelling is called "hernia of the throat," and is a large swelling of a yellow color, and is very common in women;
and there are two kinds: natural, and accidental
or the natural one has no cause
And the cause of the accident is in two ways, for one is similar to fat, and the other manner is similar to an abscess coming from an artery. and there is doubt, and one cannot safely work without fear except in this case, and it proves and seeks all the surrounding tissues: if you find it like that, with no fat, and cannot touch any vein, if you grasp it, as we grasp the testicles, and pull at all its circumference, if there is no point there then you must tightly embrace all around, and cure it as if it were sane.</start_of_turn>
There are many ways for us to be like this, of which I will tell you all the resemblances.</start_of_turn>
And thus it is known that I tell of all the difference which is between a nut and a bolt.
I say that dislocation is a swelling and fever lasting as long as the boils are not passed, and is accompanied by swelling therefore rest the fever and the swelling.
Without nut there is neither fever nor swelling nor pain, and contains its own sac, which is its own colour, and begins like a fatty substance, and becomes large;
and resemble butter, or grease, or moisture, and moisture of a yellow colour as I have said in the division
And the manner of the inquiry of abscesses of us is that you take more moisture from the root than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs and fingers, until you know that the instruments have perceived the mark; then that it be according to the greatness of the abscess; then draw out the entrament, and take care that the spur does not bleed
And the method of questioning abscesses of the bones is that you take more moisture from the bone than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs and big toes inward until you perceive that the marrow has sensed the pain, and that this is according to the size of the abscess
Then take away the entraumissor and beware of the sudden jerk.
When moisture covers it completely, as it has been mentioned previously regarding other incisions;
And if after removing the entraumissor no more moisture appears, although it was fat previously, if you pierce it, take hold with tweezers and burn away the surrounding area with a bit of soot, taking care not to burn the coat where you are working with the needle;
If you do not manage to remove it completely, if you pull out pieces, nothing will remain.
For if nothing remains, it will come back many times again;
and if there is still some remaining, and it does not trouble you, if you apply corrosive powders and hold the wound firmly, and put soothing things on the wound above, and treat it with other cures until it is healed
And if it is great, if it costs two pounds of the wound, and cure it of what fills it.
And if the wound bursts against you or another, if you are in a hurry and use powdered vitriol, leave it for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the bloodletting; Then return to the covering that has been delayed by now.
See here the forms of the entrapped instruments, and there are three ways: Large, medium, and small
And there are three quarters that are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and there are three ways of doing it Great, medium, and small, to encompass the fistulas of abscesses.
They are like needles which we extract from wounds, and are of saffron, or iron, or silver, and must be strong enough to hold those which are yellow, and are more proven by black soot to encompass the curves of the fistula.
They are of three kinds. Great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the wound.
The shapes of these needles resemble mustard seeds, as you can see here:
and if the needles have two curves of three kinds also;
And if there are three curves and are also of three kinds;
And if there are two curves and there is only one curve remaining, and there are three kinds of curves.
All these curves are necessary for their substance.
The head of these bones is thick, and there are some which do not break through the skin but only on one side, from which we strip the hair, because of this we do not touch the vein or the nerve;
And of these inward protrusions are the bones that are returned in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them when the incisions are made
There are three kinds of these bones. Great, small, and medium, if you see it;
Great, small, and medium, if you see it; do not use it elsewhere but in the joints, as in the leg, arm, shoulder, elbow, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
and never make use of any other small instrument, like the knuckles of fists, in this fashion, as it will obstruct blood flow.</start_of_turn Blood does not swell in the breasts of many patients when they begin to fester, so that they seem like breasts of a woman; and they become heavy and limp, and those who see them will believe they are cured, if they are treated according to this form from line b to g.
Never swell the breasts of some men when they are about to become corrupted, until they appear like the breasts of a woman.</start_of_turn
and endure pain and boils, and who sees them cured, if it can be cured in this fashion from line b to line g.</start_of_turn Then scrape away the fat, and use the medical plaster thickly spread, and sew up the wound with stitches; and cure it until it is healed.
When the breast swells down and is relieved by its great size, as with women, if the wound is within two ribs below, by two similar incisions. So that one holds the greater line against the lesser one, so that the greater line contains the lesser one in this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; Then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and mix in what we have said of stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed
And if he is not sound, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient cannot rest, or for the discharge of blood, if you must, fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order. And leave it until it has consumed the remnant and the fat, then cure it until it is sound again.
If there is moisture contained, it must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
When any swelling is in the apostem, if one employs the wound of fine cotton, and leaves it until the other side, then bind up all the cotton, and cure the wound that comes from that as long as it is sound.</start_of_turn> And if the apostem resembles carbuncles, if one does as we have said in cuts for carbuncles, and if the wound has entered the swelling, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
From the root of the artery
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is split which is above, if there are many abscesses again, and also there is blood escaping from the vein and from the rupture;
and if you know that this is due to the artery, if the abscesses are large and protrude significantly.</start_of_turn> and when you have known this, if you know it is stretching;
And when it comes to the vein, if it is rehearsed to flee from its opening;
And when it comes to the vein, if it is rehearsed to flee from its opening, it is foolish to cover this incision, and even more so when it is full of blood clots and abscesses, or other bones, and there is great pain. One must therefore avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is at the head must also avoid it, and in the one who has a swelling of an artery has done by the above the skin along the length.
then one must uncover the size as one can, and depart well the artery from its covering, until it is uncovered;
then one must take hold of the blood clot with an awl, and make it bleed until it reaches the other edge, and strain the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
Then point the limb that is between the two liens of an introspective as long as it is without fault, and cut the aponeurosis;
Then bring the cure that sustains the bow, as long as it bites; Then cure that which comes out following this one, as long as it is sound
And if the aponeurosis is of the size of the vein, if you must hold your hand that you put the aponeurosis to the whole skin, then take out the awl from the limb that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there must be two threads, so that you can pull it from the other side Then bind the aponeurosis, as I have said, or ligate it with two threads of the same kind;
If you doubt that the wound will not heal, if it recoils from a thorn once, do the same again with three thorns at the site of the first thorn, and strain the wound for three days.
Then cauterize the surrounding area until the pus comes to the surface, then cauterize the pus until it is black, and leave only what is bound;
Then put on a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, and mix with cures of sponges and poultices until it is healed.
And this often occurs in cases of attendants and those who must endure them or in all limbs where there are joints, and it is I grieve abscesses, and its colour seems like the colour of honey, and is in many dispositions with pain; and when it is strained, if it causes pain to the patient, it is not like honey, but like blood; and it swells very much from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, neither upwards or downwards, and that which is in the joints cannot be covered with iron: by chance there will be contraction; and he who is head or neck or brow, will burst the skin at the hairline.
And this often happens with adjuvants and must be treated with care in the joints or in other places, and this is the cause of many post-operative deaths, and its color is like that of saffron, and is in many other situations accompanied by pain
And when it is strained, if the patient feels pain, and does not wish to endure any more pain, but desires to depart, let him go out.
He must remain perfectly still in all parts, neither going forward nor backward, neither to the left nor to the right, neither up nor down, and he who is in the joints must not be bound by iron: because there will be contraction. And he who is at the head or the shoulder or the front, makes the skin taut around the nail
And he who is at the head or the shoulder or the front, makes the skin taut around the nail If the abscess is small, if he has one tooth remaining, and grasps it at the root
If it is large, if the cavity has pus, and it is burned, and the bone is fractured, and the wound is closed at the suture, and the cure is made as long as it is healthy
Never have I seen such a thing in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease which is called "funge" because of its resemblance to a worm, and its root is subtle, and its head is large.
and there are both small and large grains.
and I have seen many people who had two or more of these things in their belly which appeared more like worms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thick root, and were filled with moisture.
I cut them out and found in one XVIII ounces and in the other VI and a half, and the work in the incision if you look to see if the patient is moist is white and bloody and has a thick root If the shoulder hangs loose and hangs large, and you are in my presence, I order the cautery of fire.
If the shoulder hangs loose and hangs large, and you are in my presence, I order the cautery of fire. For at that time there often comes too great a flow of blood, and if you do not delay, if you do not hasten, then indeed you must cauterize.</start_of_turn>
And if you see the patient groaning and fearful from the incision of the wound, if you take a thread of silk well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.</start_of_turn
Then the restraint, and do not cease to tighten the thread of silk until it holds the artery, and ask from him what he feels;
And if the roots are large, if there is fear of breaking the shoulder blade itself for the belly, but you must indeed cover half, then cauterize that it does not return.</start_of_turn
Then treat the wound, and keep that you do not cover the hair which is of coarse color and poor sense and yellow milk.
When the shoulder joint is inflamed.
If a boil appears, it comes by burning of the wound or incision of the abscess, and is on the belly and there are some pus, as it happens in other ways, or blood that clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or swelling; and if it is through the abscess and through the issue of the bowel, if it is the color of the afterbirth resembling the color of cheese, and is a light thing with little pain, and opens with various issues. Then if pus appears, it comes from cautery of wound or incision of abscess, and is above the belly and in the flanks, as it happens in other ways, or blood that clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windgrittiness.
And if it is through the opening of the abscess and the discharge of pus, if its color is like that of the post, it is a light matter causing pain, and is an open wound of various discharges. If it is by moisture, it is a light matter; open it well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain me; and if it is by blood, if it is opened by these signs, the abscess is great and hard, and is filled according to a quantity; and if it is by wind, if it is blown upon the touch, and the work is that you must observe whether it appears to be by the blood of an artery or a vein, or the wind.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not restrain me;
And if it is for blood, if it is wide open by these signs, the abscess is great and hard, and is closed according to a quantity. And if it is for moisture, if the toucher is soft, and the work is that you see if it appears due to the blood of an artery or a vein, or moisture.
And if it is for moisture, if the toucher is soft, and the work is that you see if it appears due to the blood of an artery or a vein, or moisture. For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or in this chapter concerning abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein If it appears to be by intestine or swelling, instruct the patient to hold his breath, and when he has exhaled completely, then mark around the swelling with your finger; then command him to grasp your hands together, and extend the limb that you have marked at all its joints; then pull the limb that is opposite to the swelling a quarter of its way; then bind it firmly with a strong thread or strong silk cord, and hold it in place; then uncover half of the swelling and place your index finger and the thumb over it; if you find the intestine caught in the binding, if you pull it out, let go of the swelling and bring the intestine back through the navel; if you find the swelling, if you grasp it at the navel and squeeze out the excess; if the artery opposes this, or the vein, if it is going well, then return to your work and take two needles, and pass two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have done in the shape that you think you will pierce; then strain the swelling for three days over the needles, and if you see that it is over, break the needles, and leave the limb as long as it swells, and cut off the dead tissue by itself; or you can cauterize it when it is small and soft, and cure the limb of what is necessary, and keep the swelling as we have said; and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the limb of what is necessary, and bandage the limb.
And if it appears from the intestine or the bile, then you must command the patient to hold his breath, and keep it extended, and then mark around the belly; Then command him to grasp between your hands, then go around the limb that you have marked at all the circumference, then pull half of the abscess downwards to the greatest extent Then he binds it around a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let us know if it is secure.
Then he stretches half of the abscess outwards on the limb, and under that he must place the index finger, and the thumb; if you find it grasped by the limb, if you loosen it, and bring the intestine away from the belly
and if you find the bone fractured, if you grasp it at the edge, and cut off the surplus
and if the artery or the vein has been injured, if it is bleeding excessively, then go back to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have made in the form of a cross that you make pierce
Then strain the abscess in four days upon the needles; if you see it, break the needles, and leave the wound open until it bursts, and take the dead matter away by itself. or you can put it in when it is small and soft, then cure it of what is necessary, and close the abscess as we have said before.
or you can put it in when it is small and soft, then cure it of what is necessary, and close the abscess as we have said before. Drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of what is necessary, and suture the wound
We have said in the division the signs of a boil, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how it should be avoided; and we say that a boil swells in the marrow, and has great caution in its cure, and that the old men say that when a boil is in the bone or can be pulled out like a boil that is in marrow, and in the flesh, and similar things, and that it must be removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is great and old, if you do not approach it, for I do not know that it can be cured; nor has anyone ever cured it before me. We have said in the preceding chapters about the signs of abscess, and how one should work on them with medicines, and how one should shun the cautery treatment
We say that an abscess is dangerous in the marrow, and great caution should be used in its treatment, and they say that the old people often leave an abscess open when it is in the bone or can be drained if it is pus-filled, and in swelling, and similar things, and that one must remove it entirely when it is in its beginning
for I know of no cure in such a case.
When it is in the flesh or we can remove it, as we have said, you must never purge the black bile from the patient.
then make him healthy if he shows excessive fullness, then remove the cause of the ailment gently;
then drain your abscesses or carbuncles, and the head of all parts, and the bone of all parts together, leave nothing untouched
and let the blood flow freely, and keep your hand or anything else away from it, and if it bleeds excessively from the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize as much as necessary without staining Then the treatment of other wounds as long as they are healthy.
And be trenchant from two parts. We have already mentioned in the division the signs of dropsy, and that when the collection of water is made, and the signs of swelling appear, and the treatment made by medicine, and that which is cured by fire.
and one must not touch fire in these two signs: that is to say, tympanites and hypothermia, because it is a deadly thing
then when you give these medicines for this sign which is called "eclites" of medicine, and the cure does not benefit, if you notice that the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, as for example vomiting and diarrhea, and similar things; If there is doubt, do not touch the iron, for fear of further danger.
If you see the patient with great strength, and he has no other illness except for hydrophobia alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, if you must work on him. Believe the patient right on your hands, and press the belly outwards towards the lower part of the gut, then take the bony spine in this fashion: And it is similar to a silver needle, with a head of lead or barley lighter, and on the lower part there is a little hole; and on one side there are three holes, and two on the other side, and one on the other side; and the head of the pin is cut off like a penknife. This is the form of incision which they write with the penknife. Pointed, and do not be so violent that it can come as far as the intestine when you insert it, and do not stain it
Then look if hydrophobia is hanging towards the intestines: If you think you have reached the bottom of the third bone, put two fingers on the navel And if dropsy is due to liver disease, if so make a incision on the left side of the belly at the third rib.
And if it is due to urine, if so make an incision on the right side, and do not let the patient lie on the incision until the urine has ceased to flow from that weak limb.
Then pierce through the skin with an instrument, and remove the stone, and keep your hand over the area between the skin and the bone as if grasping the quantity of an nail or as if cutting into an ear
Then pierce the bone until the callous comes out, and that is the cause of the pain, then draw out the instrument, and that is the end of the treatment. It is like a silver needle, and is of lead or charcoal lighter, and has on the lower part a small hole And if cost from one side, three parts; And if cost from one side, three parts; and two from another side, and one from another.
And the head of the shoulder is torn like a quill, and this is the form of the incision which they write to cut the quill:
At the top is the marrow, so that when the instruments come into pain, if they now descend above the instrument;
empty half or a third part, for if you empty more than that which can be contained in this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the wound, or he will bleed profusely, or he approaches death
but emptying according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the provisions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse;
Then take the instrument and hold the liquid, which is now retained by the spur that is above the socket as I have said; pierce according to this manner.
Then take the instrument again, the other way round, if you see the patient suffering this, and pour a little liquid;
Do nothing of the sort, and keep using as much liquid as necessary until the bleeding stops.
And if you are uncertain about the patient, and you give him too much liquid, if the surgeon of the burial or sand burn, and by giving him sweat or bath and sun, and if you are careful to drink; and the surgeon of medicines should dry him out until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the liquid, as I have said before
Then put or prick the soft flesh of the groin, and bind and hold it for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if he is kept closed, he will urinate and then return it; and by chance he cannot do this, because the urine that comes out will not leave him closed
If the opening of the wound is small, if it is treated with ointment of lead, as we have said, if it expands.
Then put or draw out I clo subtil of urine, and bind and hold it for III days or IV, and when it wants to urinate, if it be held close, urinate, and then put it back.
And by chance it cannot be, for the urine that comes forth will not leave it closed.
And the way of the work is that if the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the shoulder and the scapula as wide as a thumb, if the mark pricks in the middle, as it should; and you keep from discharge of blood which comes many times, and if it comes, if the stain of this blood which stains blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Those who do not have the passage at the root of their thigh are blind, for none are born who have the passage at the head of the thigh, for they cannot urinate before they have raised their thigh high and cannot urinate except for that the matter cannot come down to the navel, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of this work is that if the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the thigh and the buttock as large as a thumb, if the passage is in the middle, as it should be;
Leave the blood alone when it comes many times; if it does stain, keep the dressing of that which stains blood, and heal the wound while it is sound.
And if the wound is festering, of a bad colour and discharging pus, it is necessary to apply cautery to it.</start_of_turn> Many times blood comes out in this part, and it is a sign of bad blood;
There are both malignant and non-malignant causes of this.</start_of_turn>
If it is suspected that the cause is slight, then one must give a slight incision, and then grasp and pull out all the black matter, and then put on Egyptian cotton over it.</start_of_turn Then heal the wound while it is sound.</start_of_turn>
For when you cure it altogether, if it is not firmly secured, the head of the shoulder will be perceived [as loose]; and blackness and corruption will ensue in its root or head; if you cover all that is black and corrupted, then apply above it a plaster made of honeycomb and flour, which is made from the peel of pomegranate seeds and sometimes, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
When you have grasped it, and if the blood is still in the vein, and has partly gone into the belly and partly outwards, if it is suspected that the blood is in the vein first.</start_of_turn When he is soldered, if the doctor flees.
When you hold him together, if he does not feel secure, if his limb is grasped too tightly, there will be blackening and corruption of the limb or the flesh;
if you must crush everything that is black and corrupted, then lie on the place of honey and flour which is made of pomegranate peel and sometimes, then the doctor must make other cures until he is healed
from the circumcision.</start_of_turn>
The cautery is useful in two situations when he is soldered together. namely, at the discharge of blood and at the corruption of the flesh.
and if the limb is corrupted and retracted, if you must bite or draw out the limb a bundle of hair, and urinate the patient among the wounds;
And when the hair has grown to the root of the beard which is on those who have not had them circumcised, or if there is a wound or incision, if you must then stretch it with the instrument which is called a tweezers, until the hair is loosened from its root; deliver the hair from the beard in all parts.
And if this is the cause of discomfort, if you must stretch it with the spatula, do not touch the root of the beard or the hair
then dry it thoroughly between two, and put one fine towel of linen wet with cold water on it, which must not be wrinkled
Circumcision is not like other wounds; although when we make this work of our will, and as well as possible, if it is necessary that our work be more perfect and lighter for health.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and physicians who performed circumcision around the navel and had force and all the instruments;
if they fled the urine because there are two towels there, and by chance if one covers this one and leaves the other behind. or it covers the wound, and the pain is doubled, and the swelling which is under the navel is not securely held at the point of the limb;
and the swelling of the bone by chance escapes the wound, and repairs the work, and many times they are born again until they have no need of swelling and I desire it.</start_of_turn>
The form of the forces at the wound is like this: the two fingers should be tense and firm, and the fingers should be as great as the thumb equally:
For when you press your hand, if it is equally tense throughout, the soul tension; But let the thread be well strong and twisted about the skin;
But let the thread be well strong and twisted about the skin; and if you make the child think that you are doing it, if he understands, do not force him to hold the thread only at the root, but do make him hold it all the way around as much as possible.</start_of_turn>
Then do make him hold it straight between your hands, and bring the forces together between your hands or pull out your pieces so that the child does not see them, neither any of the instruments.</start_of_turn
Then hold your hand to the root and breathe or groan, and pull up as much as the head of the shoulder is engaged.</start_of_turn Then thoroughly wipe away the filth that is gathered; then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it well with another thread.</start_of_turn>
Then thoroughly wipe away the filth that is gathered; then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it well with another thread.</start_of_turn> And the thumb has two double bonds at the second phalanx and the base of the index finger, and overlaps between the two lines, then seize the nail downwards heavily and draw out the head of the nail. then let the blood flow freely downwards and outwards, for this is the way of the wise men. and put powder on and over the powder I drape a cloth glued with a piece of rosebud gum boiled in oil, fragrant with rosemary leaves, and leave it on until the other side is healed, and treat the other wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The forces of the limb are softened in this manner.</start_of_turn>
the two thumbs should be tense and firm, and the fingers as great as the palm equally.</start_of_turn
The error of the mundane if it is when the hair grows at the incision;
Therefore, you must extend it at your nail, so that it will not cause incision again.</start_of_turn>
and keep it even, and if you do not keep hold of your nail, if you let go, and then hold it again.</start_of_turn
And if it persists for three days, and that which is beside the belly is inflamed, if you leave it as long as the swelling subsides, and burn it gently.</start_of_turn
if you move it as you please, and keep hold of the belly, it will do no good.</start_of_turn
Therefore, cure the wound with powdered things like we have said or treat with powders, and if you move it too much, it will go down, and will do no good.</start_of_turn
Heal the wound, as we have said, until it is healed.
And thus the method of extracting urine is as follows: if you take a double thread and tie one end to the chief of wool or cotton, and pass the thread through the tube; and press out the surplus of wool and pass until you reach the chief of the tube, then join the tube with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair; and raise the bladder and the testicles with oil moist and oily, and water tepid; then put the tube gently into the testicle, until it reaches the root of the testicle; then double the testicle towards the buttock; then pull out the tube before it reaches the bladder, and make the patient feel it come out until it is empty; this must not be done except in this order for that which it leads or goes is turned; then cut the thread at both ends and the urine will follow the thread, and withdraw it forcefully, and correct the urine; and repeat the tube until the bladder is empty, and be sure the patient is aligned.
The urine is retained if there is an obstruction of the stone, or of blood clot, or of bile, or of worms, or similar things, as we have mentioned in the previous part.
If the urine is not discharged, and you see that the obstruction is caused by the stone which is in the belly or the neck of the bladder, then you must assume that the patient is hunching over his knees And put the hand over the back, extend the abdomen from the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient so that he does not move as much as he can Then hold the neck of the bladder towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is discharged easily
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, if you must, administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "syringes," for this is the form.
Or of thin, soft silver wire, like the quill of a bird. Or of a thorn of a length and a half, or of soft metal at the head
And the manner of extracting urine is that you take two threads doubled, and bind one at the head with a loop of wool or cotton, and pass the thread through the syringe.
And drain the excess of wool and hold the syringe until the patient sits on the seat, and then raise the bladder and the testicles with oil and olive oil and warm water
Then insert the syringe gently into the vein, until it reaches the root of the vein, then double the vein upwards towards the bulge.
Then pull back the syringe until the patient feels the blood coming back to the empty part, and that is not done except in the order which is necessary for the purpose; for in this way it is known whether it will succeed or fail.</start_of_turn>
Then hold the thread taut at all times, and the urine follows the thread, then draw out the thread, and do the same with the urine.</start_of_turn
And start the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and the patient is comfortable.</start_of_turn>
It is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and from one shoulder or the other; then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture which you see clustering the bladder inside it, then bind it between the two shoulders with a double bow; and burn one of those moistures on the fire; then withdraw the chief of the cluster from the limb, and stretch your hand over the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it round; then draw the thread strongly through these holes, and assemble the circle as if assembling a ball, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and bind it with the instrument; and do as if you had made a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
It is closed, and if there are three holes: I on one side, and I on the other, as you see;
I on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and if the patient grasps his chest with both hands, as we can bear with difficulty the moisture, and pushes when the matter is urgent, then…
…and when you see the physicians shivering in the belly, put the head of the sufferer in the moisture, and push whatever is in the way.
If you push out the moisture at the root, and then push strongly the thing that is in the way… if there enters moisture into the wound, and comes to the belly now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of a subtle blister from which we must blister the belly.
If it is thus: and it is of silver or gold, and the head is higher;
and the nails are drawn to the skin or the bones are fractured
then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture which you see collecting in the bladder, then bind it between the two armpits with a double thread, and burn that moisture on the fire;
then draw the head downwards towards the armpit, and hold your hand over the bladder until all the moisture has drained out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around the circumference Then I pull the thread firmly through these holes, then I assemble the circle as if I were assembling a ball, and I put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and I tie it in the instrument.
And do as if you had made a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder
I say that a stone that is incarcerated in the bladder often causes vomiting, which is a sign that the stone is pressing on the bladder almost as much as in its entirety; and there is frequent vomiting, gravel in the urine, pain in the side, and many times the patient is unable to urinate, and then becomes constipated; and from these vomiting attacks the foundations are loosened.  The cure for these vomiting attacks is more gentle in young people than in old people, and is more effective in those between youth and old age; and the cure for those who have a large stone is more gentle than for those who have a small one.</start_of_turn
We have already said in the division the methods of cutting into stones, and the extraction alongside medicines;
And I have said the difference between a stone that is inflamed like rain, and all the signs, and in what case a stone must be cut of a certain size; And in the bladder, and in the testicles
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often causes vomiting, and this is a sign that it has burst from the bladder as much as in its subtlety.
and it lets out gravel, and makes the patient groan with pain, and it makes him vomit many times, and then turns black; and from these vomiting attacks the foundations are loosened
and is light the healing of the attacks until they are three years old, and is much grief in old age, and is as harmful in youth as in old age.
and it is the easier cure for those who have the large stone than for those who have the small one.
Then take the patient by the limbs, loosen and move away, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder; and it does not go up towards the belly again; then set it between your hands as it appears, and put your hands on the patient’s thighs, so that the bladder is completely slumped downwards; then inquire and touch within; if you feel the stone in the space, do it with speed and cut over the stone immediately And if it does not bleed at the touch, if you suspect fat in the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or in the middle, if the patient is a young man with companions; then grasp it in its foundation and inquire about the stone; and when you feel it in your hand, if it is at the belly of the bladder; then press on your hand, and the stone will go out on its own or you will see it cut.
Then take the patient by the arms, and loosen and move towards the south, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not come out through the high part again.
Then make him sit between your hands, and his hands rest on his thighs, so that his bladder is completely descending downwards.
Then draw and touch inwards;
If you feel the bone out of place, if you hurry up and hold above the bone immediately
And if it does not yield with the touch, take your left thumb and index finger and apply oil to it, if the patient is old, or your middle finger if the patient is young and robust; And hold the bone in its foundation and draw the bone, and when you feel it at your thumb, if the bladder is at the neck;
Then press on your thumb, and the bone will come out naturally when you see it slip out.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the nails above, and with his left hand to grasp the skin which is below the nails in the part where the size is taken.
Then I hold the bladder covering it, so that it is like this shape: And I enter between that which is between the nails and the foundation, not in the middle but at the cost of the left nail
And be two on the stone, and two either adjoined or to the foundation, and the size will be done if it is wide because of pushing, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too large.
By chance the press if the two which are or the foundation, that it leap forward for work.
and the nails that are part of the bone or that are angled, and margins. if they are grasped to break
and if there is part which is swollen, resembling a gland, and rounded, from which there is discharge.
Therefore, if there are angles and margins, make the size greater;
and if it does not slip, you must grasp with the nails that are like a file at the head, because it must tear the bone if it does not escape or you hold it with a subtle curve at the head
and if you do not succeed in managing it, if the wound is large and the bone is fractured, if the bone is cracked without splintering.
If there are more than one stone, grasp the largest at the belly of the bladder first, then hold above, and then extract the others afterwards if there are several.
And when you loosen it, if there arises much blood from the wound of oil and water, then treat with the salve of Dijon and balsam, as long as it is sane. For two things are said to happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine comes to a standstill because his thighs cannot support it.
but all this effort you put into pulling out, or tearing out, will cause you to have chills until you pull it out piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, if you apply incense, aloe, and dragon’s blood, and hold it still, and put over it a moist bandage soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the burn Then restore the patient on his collar, and do not loosen the link until the third joint below.
And if the stone is small, and it is either a tube or passage of the bladder, and is fixed in place, and the urine cannot pass; if the doctor of this whom I have mentioned before tells you to enlarge it many times, we shall hear of the size for this treatment.
And if blood clots come to the wound and corruptions, and swelling of blood in the bladder, and either hold back the urine, which is known in part as a dry urine without mixing with the urine. Then take out the clot from the wound, and drain that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and carry it away
Then lift the wound of acute and easy and soft, and give the patient all the help you can, as long as he is sane;
And know that all the times you cure him, that you bind the two stitches, and gather the medicines above the limb
And if the stone is small, and it is in the bladder or the urethra, and is fixed in place, and the urine cannot pass; If the cure for this which I say above is not sufficient, and you must do it many times, you will hear of its size in this cure. Then I take a thread and tie it around the bladder neck at the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then I grasp the thread lightly, until it reaches the stone; and I turn the thread back and forth at the stone until I can see the stone from the other side; when the urine comes, then I press my hand on that which remains of the stone that is in the bladder
If it is burst, and spurts out with the urine, and is seen by the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason, if you take a thread from the stone and another from below, and pass the bladder towards the stone between the two lines, then grasp the stone and pull it out, and loosen the thread, and massage the blood clot which is in the wound; and the doctor should continue treating until it is healed
Then take a thread and tie it around the base of the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder.
Then pull the thread gently until it comes out at the stone; and turn the thread around the stone until you can pierce the stone from the other side
When the urine comes out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is in the bladder. If the urine is broken in many pieces, and spurts out with the urine, and is stained with blood, the patient is in pain.
If you are unable to do this by any means, if in this case you feel the stone in the bladder and another below, then put the thumb of your hand on the stone between the second and third ribs, then grasp firmly and extract the stone, freeing the loop of the vein, and compress the bleeding that is in the wound and heal it until it is whole.</start_of_turn>
And the third method if it happens that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows this art of hands; and the fourth method if the woman's stone is more blunt than the man's, for in this case one can make a deeper cut, and there is great fear of it. And if it is necessary to do this, if one takes a little knowledge of this, and touches the navel with the thumb, and if one does not find it, one must not cast aside the subtle art; and one should present a dance well known among women, or a woman who knows a part of this art, and command her to do what one commands of her with the inquiry of the stone; and watch well if the woman is a virgin: for in this case one can push back her burden or foundation and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, if she constrains her navel, one must recommend that she hold her navel or with the patient, and command her to stretch out her left hand on the bladder.
It is known that the stone is retained in women, and if it does not happen again, it is a good sign, and is protected by three things:
one is that the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that one cannot find a woman who truly knows herself, even when she is chaste.
And the third is that it is often impossible to find a woman who truly knows herself in this art of lovemaking;
And the fourth is that if the woman’s seed is more profound than the man’s, because it can make a deeper size, and great pain it has. And if you need this, if you take a woman who truly knows herself, and prick her right away, and if you do not find it, then there is no woman of sense in this world
And the fifth is that there is a great wisdom in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command of her with the inquiry of the seed. And look well if the woman is a virgin.
And look well if the woman is a virgin. therefore he must push forward his head or root and question the bone;
and if the truth be told, if he constrains her head from the back, and he recommends that she stretch her head or with the patient, and press her left hand on her belly
if she tells the truth, if he can make her move from the belly to the flank of the belly until she reaches the root of the thigh.
then touch in the root of the thigh find the middle of the bone, lying or it is hidden there, and feel the bone in that part and do not move his head up or down, and let the size be small at first
and do not move his head up or down, and let the size be small at first Then hold the limb steady in its normal position, if you feel the bone is too close to the wound until the bone can rest firmly, and the wound that many times before has been:
that is to say, small and large, blunt and pointed, long and rounded, and which have rained.
When the chill of blood has subsided and the limb has bled, if you return to your work while the wound is still open, until the bone is firm.</start_of_turn>
If it does not subside, put on a wet compress and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops.
then return to your work, until the bone is firm, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the arrow as a help in your work.
if it does not stop, and it is an artery that is cut, if you put powder on the limb and strain with bands and compresses, and do not attempt to move it again, and leave the bone alone, and only by chance will the patient die Then treat the wound.
Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white mucus, which is as dense as the seeds of coriander, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and never is it truly in the yolk of the egg, if we take care that this is not the case; and it is the skin of the seed between the white mucus that we have mentioned.
Moisture is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white pus, which is like coarse grains of sand that contain the seed;
It is called "syfac," and never is it properly in the seed if we take care that it is not otherwise injured It is the skin of the grain between the white pus that we have mentioned
It has not yet come out And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if there is an abscess with a portion of the bone, and because of this people think that it is one and the same bone; and if the moisture is between the skin of the bones and the soft tissue, if one feels well; then when you see the color of the moisture, if you think that it extends throughout, as we have said before.
Never does it come out from percussion on the grains, and this pus is of many colors or it is pale yellow, or without redness, or black, or pale blue, and such things occur more frequently
These are the signs of gangrene in this assembly, for if it is yellow or white as we have said, if the abscess is round like a ball, and it does not swell with the coions, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, if the abscess is round with a part of the yolk, and because of this people think that it is another ball.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the coions and the white surface, if it smells bad;
Then when you see that the color of the moisture is like this, if you sense all around that it is sour, in that case And if you find the urine corrupted by another disease, if you must tie up the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood; then cut the limb throughout the suspension, drain the urine, and cure it as we have said.</start_of_turn>
When we burn the edges with iron, if you believe that the patient is well according to the poor and the filling of his flesh;
Then the swine lies on its back, on something somewhat high, and puts under it a bundle of towels.
Then it sits on its left side, and instructs the minister to sit on the right, and extends the limb towards the second rib of the two ribs closest to the ribs of the hips
Then take the sponge, and grasp the skin of the hips between the loin and the loin, and make a complete incision dividing the skin of the hips until white fat is seen, and brown it thoroughly until it turns pale green
Then pierce the bladder straight with a large opening, and drain all the urine, and then put in the sponges, and extend the bladder upwards
Do not touch the hip bones, but only the bladder slightly Cope all at once or in pieces by yourself the cost of it to him secretly, for if you do not cope it well wisely, it will return to you acute.
and if the blood spurts from your work towards your work, if you leave it in its place when you have finished the work with the knife;
then put together the two limbs of the shoulder at a joint, and then cure it as the others wounds until it is healed
and if you find the work corrupted by another disease, you must believe that you must bind the vessels that are suspended in doubt of the discharge of blood;
then cope the limb at all the suspension, and extract the blood, and cure it as we have said.
And if it is acute and assembled in two parts together, its stakes are two branches. if you hold the other part as you did the first equally, then dry the wound and put in the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil
if you hold the other part as you did the first equally, then dry the wound and put in the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil and put another cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and put on the two nails, and put on double layers of cloth, and bind it up according to this shape:
Then take two cloths and use coarse wool like this shape and join them with stitching in the armpit, and one of the nails grasps on the foundation up to the shoulder, and the other on the painful part
and the other two nails on the two angles, and be everything assembled together the restriction in the armpit circle
And never is medicine this cautery branch like the size of iron; take instead a cautery cultellaire subtle, and prick the skin of the joints, and if necessary eschew as we have said, so that the white substance which contains the poison is discovered.
If you take the cautery as we have said, and prick that membrane as we have shown, and burn with this subtle cautery,
And prick in every way that you can, until you have scraped all of it off.
And keep that the fire does not touch the egg;
And burn until this egg is more scabbed over And watch carefully that blood does not flow, and that the work is done skillfully.
If nothing else hinders you, or an abscess bursts or blood flows, or any other mishap, if you can, cure what hinders you, according to what is said above.
If the patient is pale and hesitant, and does not wish to undergo this work because of its horror, if you deem it necessary, as I have said, and when you are certain by the indications that the wound has healed, if you wish, you can set the patient down in a raised position. Then pierce the abscess at the lower part with the entire width of the palm of your hand, and make the perforation deep enough to reach the bone;
And let the opening be large enough that all the pus comes out cleanly
Then put a swab on the wound, and bind it, and leave it open to drain the remaining fluid, then cure it until the wound is healed
If the wound does not drain pus from its opening, it is necessary to drink a dose of the instrument used for treating hydrophobia, for in this way it will form as before.
If the wound does not drain pus from its opening, and the infection recurs, it should be opened again after six months or when convenient, and when it is closed as before, the patient will be cured of his ailment.
When the section of this limb has doubt or fear of more serious complications, I believe it is better to leave it as it is
I will tell you about the work and the symptoms of an abscess
Therefore, if an abscess comes or bursts, and if there are boils; And thus it is by experience.
It is known by experience that it is painful and harmful to stretch things too much, as in the case of wounds or percussion;
and the color of the wound is like the color of healthy flesh it does not feel any pain, and is a wound of grief
and by chance there is a bleeding wound, painful and bloody, with discoloration of the color, and never comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.
When it is not from a vein, if it is known by the disposition of the wound to be hot, when you press it with your hand; it is only that you should touch it lightly
Whoever is made of the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition at the expression of pain in the two hands, and can well make the size of this semblance, and of the others. Whoever is made of the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition at the expression of pain in the two hands, and can well make the size of this semblance, and of the others. And it is that you must keep the head of the bone upwards, and the body of the bone white with fat, and deliver the ligament from all parts of the bone.
If the bone is already softened with these bones, if you must then draw the bone, and keep it fixed;
And if it is hollow with the fat, or in what is in the blood vessels, if you must draw it out, and keep it rounded
Of the abscess of the buttocks.
This is an abscess covered with a covering resembling a berry, with the softening of the hairs, and the patient groans greatly when he moves; and the cure for this disease is well known as much as this one that we have just mentioned, and all the learned men will tell you the work of this is as perilous as this one.
This is an abscess enclosed by a covering resembling an eyelid, with softening of the surrounding tissue, and the patient groans in pain when he moves.
The treatment for this ailment is indeed as perilous as the former one, and all of you should know the work of this chapter, as the ancients have done.</start_of_turn>
You must make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, then support the swelling of the tissue below the armpit towards your chest, and all the surrounding veins that extend towards the armpit, and grasp the master, and extend them outwards.</start_of_turn
Then cut the large vein deeply through to the extent that it is uncovered, and then pull out the clot from the root, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples.</start_of_turn
Then if he thrusts in a needle or if there is double thread, and binds it to the first bone or the head of the nail has come loose, and binds it to the other head. Then he grasps firmly in the middle directly, according to the length of the bone, and pulls out the corrupt moisture
Then he closes the wound like the others or we apply an ointment, so that no vessel breaks that can cause bleeding from one of the bones.
for by this means no harm comes, and if all the blood vessels come, if you can draw out the bones from all the blood vessels. if the bone does not lose its nourishment from the incision of the blood vessels, and is dry and does not swell aid
The events of this branch are by incision coming from the navel or from the swelling above the belly in the groin, for the intestines descend from that passage to one of the buttocks.
and this passage is either by incision from the navel or from the swelling of the groin, and comes from two ways:
or by percussion, or by jumping, or by pressure, or by the elevation of pain below the belly, and by similar things.
and the sign that it is by swelling of the navel is that there is swelling and swelling in a long line, and does not come immediately and is the swelling equal until towards the navel, because the navel presses the intestines
If you command or the patient must retain the intestine in its place in the wound, if it can enter; then either tie a knot on its collar between your hands, and hold the thighs; then turn the thumb upwards, and grasp all the skin of the buttocks long; then take hold of the intestines from the belly button to the groin; and as much as you have seen to open the wound, and do as much as you can; then uncover the section of the intestine that is under the skin of the buttocks, until the fatty section is discovered throughout; then put your index finger into the hole that is between the fatty section which is under the skin of the buttocks, and the second section, and withdraw that which is behind the belly button, and between the second section; and then move the thumb of the right hand into the hole of the buttocks, and place the fatty section at the top of your left hand, and keep the belly button against all the sections; and command the minister to extend the belly button upwards, and untie what is behind the knot; and ask at your sides if there is any intestine or fatty section that is hard, and if you find nothing, if the gut is in its place again; then take a needle or make a large thread of X threads, and pass it through the back part of the section, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the belly button, then grasp the threads that appear from the needle, until there are three threads; and join them together in the shape of a cross, and tie the section, which we have said is under the skin of the buttocks, with a strong knot of two parts; then cover the threads with cloth, and tie them together in two parts, so that no vessels that support them can enter into the wound, except for the staple, which should not be too tight; and adjust the knot according to the first knot that you did two fingers from that; and after these two knots leave the section of the intestine that is under the thumb of the buttocks with a space of two fingers; and after all the rest according to the roundness of the belly button; then grasp the part that is under the skin of the buttocks, until it is without tension, and bow as we have said before; then apply coarse wool soaked in oil, and put it in the wound, and apply the knot that we have said.
And never is the fat cauterized after the incision, in doubt of the discharge of blood.
For in this work, it often happens that blood flows out due to opening a vein; and if it is delayed at the root, if it is raised with warm water, put on what has been said above until it flows; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is completely healed.
And if you command or the patient has retained the intestines within the wound, if it can be returned, then keep your thumbs against his collarbone between your hands, and hold the intestines in place.</start_of_turn>
extend the arm downwards, and grasp all the skin of the flanks along their length.</start_of_turn then withdraw the intestines to the size of thumbs according to what you have learned by opening the wound, and keep them from slipping out.</start_of_turn
then uncover the surface that is under the skin of the flanks, until the fat covering is discovered throughout.</start_of_turn
then grasp your middle finger where the flank meets the white covering that is under the skin, and where the second covering is, and pull away what is behind the belly and what is behind the second covering.</start_of_turn
And when the hand moves from the elbow towards the wrist, and the white bones are extended above the hand, and the thumb is towards the whole of the palm; And instructs the minister to extend the thumb upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligament.
And if there is any intestine or white bone that is hard, and you find no other thing, if you touch the belly below the navel
then take a needle or if there is thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the back part of the palm, which is after the skin of the wrist after the size, then tie the knots that appear from the threads, until there are three threads left over. Then join them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind them with silk, which we mentioned previously is the substance of the coats of mail, with a strong thread of two parts. Then cover the heads of the bones with thread, and bind them firmly with two parts, so that no vessel except the nerves that supply them can enter into the opening, except where the incision is made. And put the thread straight according to the first thread, two palms long, and after these two palms leave the silk which is the substance of the coats of mail remaining, which is great like two palms And after all that according to the curve of the egg-shell that the eye carries;
Then bind in the part which is the substance of the coats of mail, as much as to keep it steady, and bow it, as we mentioned previously
Then apply soft wool soaked in oil, and put on the wound, and I apply the thread that we have mentioned. In this branch I have never seen anyone who could cure it with iron. For this often happens, and let the thread stay in place until it heals by itself;
and if it becomes late at night, if it has risen from a warm bath, put on what we have mentioned until it heals by itself
Then treat the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly healed.
At no time does blood come out like angry flames, as we have said, and open the wound; and do not touch any intestines as you go, and if you do, it is because of fear, and repair them all every hour; and whatever remains if it stays too long in this place, if you believe the wound or abscess, until the intestines come out; and this is caused by the extension of the sinew which is like an angry flame, as we have said, because it is stretched, then is softened and pulled down by the wound and opened; and it is cured if it is by cautery, as we have said before; and never by iron in this manner: and let the patient lie comfortably on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the fracture and pull it out wide according to the quantity of three fingers; and then draw out the sinew which is from below the leather that covers it, then take hold of the nail and pull it out from the wound that appears from the sinew; and press on the wound at the navel, then cut out the two nails that appear from the sinew on the head of the nail; and cut the head of the nail, and do not touch the sinew or stretch the toe or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the sinew of the intestines; then cure it with the wound remedy.
When you have grasped the threads, if the wound bleeds and heals, as long as it is sound.
And the old people say that it is made like the twig that binds the nut, in part like you bind the blood vessels, after the size above loosely over the skin;
Then put on the bandage, and treat the abscess of what causes it, until the blood vessels bleed;
And the cure is as we have said, as long as he is sound.
Never comes rupture into anger, as we have said, and opens the wound
and does not leave any intestines as clots, and if there are any, that is enough, and repair them every hour
and if it stays too long in this place, if he believes the wound or swelling, as long as the intestine comes out;
and this comes from the extension of the sinew which is in anger, as we have said, because it is stretched, then becomes soft and relaxes the wound
and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before
And never is it cured by iron in this manner. And only does the patient lie still on his back between your hands, and grasp the limb of the root inflamed with a large loop according to the quantity of three fingers wide.
And then draw out the scab which is below the leather that covers it, and take hold of the root and pull the limb out from the wound of the scab
And press on the belly, then cut the two visible veins of the scab on the top of the root, and cut one and the other
Then draw out the root, and cover neither the scab nor extend the eye or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the radix of the intestines; Then treat the wound with the treatment of wounds.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of wounds. Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in young boys, because the worms that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is mixed, when it is seen to be cured, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and takes the softened skin from the natural skin; then brings together the two layers with a suture, and if you see it, close the excess of softened skin with two or three stitches firmly; then take out between the stitches, and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
Dou chastrement.
When sausage is scorched according to our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary to force it except in two ways: one is that the witness to the wound responds when asked, and the cure of the wound; and the other, because we have often had to burn the hair of beasts for our assistants, as with goats and sheep and cats and other beasts.</start_of_turn>
Many times is the skin of the joints softened in summer homes, because the worms that are inside are softened, and it is seen;
and it is necessary, when one sees it being cured, to make the patient sit up on his back, and to stretch the softened skin over the natural skin;
then assemble the two limbs at a suture, and if you see it, sew up first the excess of softened skin at three sutures or four firmly;
then stretch between the sutures, and cure like the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
In the traction method, we put the best in hot water, until the hairs are softened and limp; then we pull them out with our hand, until they are removed and you no longer feel them.</start_of_turn
Wounds that are caused by sharp objects is forbidden in our law, and because of this I do not wish to speak of them in this book.
And it is not necessary to do anything else except for two methods.
One of which is that the patient looks in the eye and answers when asked, and that he is cured in the eye itself.
The other is that we often mix with the attendants various animals for our assistants, as with goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
I say therefore that laughter is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision
In the one where we do it by attraction, we make the best sit in hot water, until the bones are softened and limp; then we pull at the limb until it is set and you can no longer feel it
Du chastrement de taille: You must hold yourself steady, and press the skin of the armpits to your left hand, then bind the sling, and grasp each limb at its root, when you have well secured them.
And let no drop of blood escape from the vessel; and loosen the tight dressing that is over the vessels.</start_of_turn>
And this method of treatment is more silent than that which is done by traction, because with traction it lingers by chance no movement of the limb, by which it is best desired luxury.</start_of_turn
Then cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And the treatment for obesity and laziness is if you burn the fat tumours completely, and cure it as with other wounds; in the second method, for those whose urine spurts through the skin of the belly, if there is no cure.
Hermaphroditism is in two ways as at home: one if it is that between the two genitals appears as the figure of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes it urinates.</start_of_turn
The tension of the limb is a tumour which appears on the natural part, as long as it is too heavy to see; and many women have had as much as a hand, and this is the cure.
And the treatment for the wound and the burn is that you should grasp the boils that arise, and treat them like other wounds.
In the second method, for those who urinate through the skin of their buttocks, if there is no cure for it.
The ailment is a boil that is raised on the natural part, as long as it is too painful to see and many women have it as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
It is necessary that you hold the superabundance of the boil at your hand or as one would do with tweezers, and grasp it lightly;
do not go too deep, for blood does not come out, then treat it with another cure until it is healed
And at another time it happens that from the mouth of the marrow there comes an inflammation, and swelling, and by chance a spasm occurs, which is like the shape of a cow; and for this reason it is called the ancient "coward's disease". If the patient is sweating profusely, it is close to appearing.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not clearly perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural in birth, or an accident by disease that brings it about
and it is natural in birth, or an accident by disease that brings it about or it is caused by a sudden spasm, or by a soft or thick pus that forms in the marrow, or along the ribs, or from the spleen, or something like that
and it is manifested by coughing, vomiting, and by chance flowers burst forth.
And the knowledge of this comes from the observation of dance.
And if the bone is split, if you suspend it at the incision and grasp; and have the medicines at hand, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and eggs; then mix in a large amount of lead plaster, so that the wound does not adhere; and let it be long, and mix in a handful of dry lint; then let the cure be finished off with other treatments until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If it is soft and slippery, and it is close to two thumbs, if you rush and grasp it, you will tear it off.</start_of_turn>
Put your two thumbs together, and the woman should be behind her, spreading out her legs.</start_of_turn
Then the two thumbs will form, as long as the slippery substance is round and covers the nails.</start_of_turn
Then take wax, and mix it with oil, and put it on the limb, and lie the woman at rest without moving her arms.</start_of_turn
For the marrow obstruction which is in the bone, do not touch it with fire.</start_of_turn
If the nails are bitten through, if you suspend it on the twine and grasp it.</start_of_turn
And have the medicines that stay blood, as cam acaice, blood of dragon, incense, and such like an egg in abundance;
Then mix in a dose of lard sufficient, so that the wound cannot clot.</start_of_turn>
And let it be long, and mix in a handful of dry linen.</start_of_turn
And let it be cured of other cures until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Emorroydes are openings of veins which, without restraint, are usually harmless; but when old, they become swollen. As we have said in the previous chapters, their signs and symptoms are like those of wounds; and I shall now speak of those which signify a cure. I say that when emoroids and swelling are immersed in mud, and are not felt, if not treated by fire.
Those which are at the mouth of the mud, we can feel, are those which we can cure Hemorrhoids are open veins which do not usually cause pain, and when they are old they become swollen.</start_of_turn
And as we said in the division the signs and symptoms, and I will tell you those that indicate a cure.</start_of_turn
And if it sticks, that is good.
If not, if air is blown on the swelling at the back and there are worms seen moving, then take lint, soak it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elderberry with old wine, and blow on the limb.
It is proper therefore that you place the woman in a cold house, then extend the alternum towards the heel, and hold it in its roots, then sprinkle upon medicines that restrain blood, such as chamomile and dragon’s blood and incense, and similar things.
then cover its parts with a vessel, then put it in cold water.
and if blood comes, if you make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and elderberry and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and mustard, and make I plaster on her back.
Emoroids are tears in veins which do not usually heal without treatment; and when they are old they become black. We have already mentioned the signs and symptoms of such ailments, and I will now tell you of those which resolve the cure. I say that emorroids and blackheads, when pressed into the marrow, are not felt, except by the physician. It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the blackhead and press it into its roots, then sprinkle on medicines which restrain blood, such as alum and dragons blood and incense, and the like; then leave it for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if there is still blood, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate seeds and barley and the like, then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and cheese, and make a plaster of it. And if it swells, that is good. If not, make her vomit at the back and give her vinegar with wine vinegar, and make her vomit. And when the abscess rests, if it has cured the limb of its swelling as long as it is sane; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the blackhead. And then it will heal as long as it is sane. And when the abscess rests, if it has cured the limb of its swelling as long as it is sane; and the one which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough beard, if you cover it as I have said the blackhead. And then it will heal as long as it is sane. If this does not suffice, if she has windblows on her back and has swellings like wounds;
then take linen and moisten it in the juice of plantain or in the juice of elder with old wine, and make her breathe deeply.
When the abscess is opened, if the wound remains clean and healthy;
and that which is called the "albathir" is red, and is like a large asp, if you cover it as I have said before. then the wound remains clean and healthy.
And when the abscess bursts open, and one washes the hand well, if it is covered with pus at the root, if the bowel is emptied, one must put into the wound some soft lint soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil; and put the dressing firmly over the wound, and put over it a layer of coarse wool covered with a fine linen cloth soaked in water or mallow which have been boiled; then one must cure it after two days following this, until it is healed; and in no way lift the wound and the bowel by squeezing with water and honey, and then with water or licorice root and chamomile which have been boiled; then return to the oiling.
It is therefore necessary that I say that when I treat the abscess from the marrow which comes into the marrow, which is not just an abscess but which coarsens the bowe
and if you know the work of iron, if you see that the abscess is still in the beginning of its coming, and is full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you see it Therefore do not urge me to pierce, but let me linger until the pain is appeased.
Then let the patient sit down on my seat, and take two small stools or he will recline, and support himself on his back and join together his parts that are bent towards the limb;
Let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms across his knees, and bind them firmly with a strong thread
Then draw up the ball towards the breastbone, and bring the instrument from which we hope to expel the marrow; for after that comes the shape
And know that when you bring the instrument to expel the marrow, that you must first test the depth of the marrow, so that what enters between the instrument and the bone does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient. And if the spasm is more violent, if you must cover the bottom of the wound with a layer of cloth, so that the spasm does not grieve.
And you must put the horn of the instrument at its base, and hold the instrument tight.
When the abscess bursts, and the hand is swollen, if you must cover the head and shoulder with a bandage;
When the bladder is emptied, if you must put in the wound some soft sponges soaked in rose oil, or in dry green oil;
Put the outer dressing firmly over the bottom of the wound, and put above the wound and the loincloth a layer of fine linen soaked in water or mallow which has been boiled
Then the cure after two days of oiling following that, as long as he is well;
Then never lift the bruise and the wound by clinking with water and honey, and then with water or liquorice root and herbs long should be cooked.</start_of_turn> Then return to the oiling.</start_of_turn>
For it never comes from her feet, nor from her arms or hands, or from her belly, or from her chin, but comes from her collar and from other evil figures; if the master is at the dance that she be wise and skillful in these things, and be wary of error and deceit, and I shall show you all the figures by which we must aid her
When the child comes down naturally on his head and the woman gives birth groans, and her strength is weak, if you make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and as soon as her nature is overcome with oil or rue or fennel, which is customary, then lie down between her thighs the little cushion from which this is made: Master first at the bath that she knows the figure of the natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell of urine:
then she must immediately give birth.</start_of_turn then her membranes that the childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the issue with his head, and the secondine with him.</start_of_turn
And when you see these signs, if you must press gently his belly, so that the fetus is thrust forward.
because when it descends upon his head, if it is with the secondine together, and the marrow of his superfluities is broken by excessive bending.
and this comes about not naturally.
For it never comes from its bones, but comes from the ribs or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes from his belly, or standing, and is overturned by chance from his chin, and by other harmful postures
if it is mixed with the play that it is wise and subtle in these things, and you must beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the postures in which you must help him
If the woman is in labor and her head comes forward naturally, and the woman groans, and her strength is weak, if she sits on a chair, or the women hold her;
and her nature is relaxed or softened with oil or unguent, and then she will give birth between her two legs, the little spur which is its shape. and tears the second membrane, and grasps at its nail as long as the moisture which is in its core escapes;
and press the belly of the woman until the child comes down, and if it does not come down, it is necessary to stimulate the woman with muscle from fenugreek with oil of alum
then make her take and cough out of congestion, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour. If now it is loosened.
If the two hands are forced out, if you must know, you must hold them firmly so as not to move them too much and too little; and if they will not enter, put the woman on the seat and hold the feet up high; then loosen the seat on the ground, and hold the woman, so that she does not scratch during the loosening
and if the hands will not enter, and the limb is dying, if you press the hands at the shoulder which is put forward, pull out the limb and keep it even.
If not so strong as we have said, if the limb is twisted and turned about, as long as it is in accordance with the natural figure. When the limb comes back to its place, I know you must push upwards; And then the bone twists here and there, as long as it is even;
and then grasp the limb and extend it here and there.
Can it jump up until the heels, if the order is to grasp it, and make it vomit from tension? if it jumps violently, God help us.
because of the issue of the child from its knees. When the child comes in this form, if he puts his hands on his chin and chin; then either stroke his neck, and hang his head down, and put his tongue out; and fold his hands on his chest and then take his hands on his belly, and stretch his cushions down, until it is apparent from his throat; and if the child does not jump, take his hands and move them forward, then move his belly up, and put his hands back; and the child will gasp and gasp; and tell the woman to hold him until the child is gone.
And if it does not jump violently as we have said, take muscle powder of almond, sesame oil, gum mastic, and mustard, and grind them all together in a mortar; and put on the woman's body under the armpits and expel this swelling, then make her sit in hot water until the ribs are relaxed;
and when she is softened down, give her a collar of myrrh, and put on her clothes, and leave her for an hour. Then he sits upon the seat, then he coughs and strains his mouth and his nose, and he grasps the belly slightly, for now the fetus jumps.
I can teach you to restore the limb: if it cannot be restored, if you make the woman rise up, cry out; if she cannot cry out, make her groan on her tongue, and extend her legs forward; then bring in the muscle I mentioned before; and if she does not cry out, make her sit on the seat, and observe to restore the limb; and when the limb is restored naturally, make her cough, and command her to hold still until the child is gone. When the fetus comes in this form, if he puts his hands and feet together; then either he hangs his head on his collar and hangs his lips down, or he lets himself slip out of it and grasps his hands together under his belly, and leans over his knees, until the navel appears in the mouth and if the fetus does not jump, if he takes his feet and moves them, then he moves his belly upwards, then he brings his hands back; and the child is born together with his hands and feet And command her to stay still until the children are gone.
I command thee that thou holdest thy hand stiff, then turnest it back and forward, and moveth it lightly; and when it is even, put upon the fleshy substance of alum and oil, as we have said, and then commandest her that she move back and forth; and when thou hast done this, sittest thou down and commandest her to grasp; and she shall expectorate. I must order her to remain silent: if she cannot be silenced, if she raises the woman and alerts her.
if she cannot alert her, if she makes her gesture on the ground and pulls her legs forward
then bring in the spasm which I have mentioned;
and if she does not depart, if you make her sit on the bench, then study to return the limb and the children according to their natural figure, and make her spit, and command her to stay still until the children are gone
When it comes to this method at all times, if thou graspest the second finger at its nail, while the moisture is evacuated; and if the fetus bends over its face and neck, if thou grasp the navel, that it be not retained, and the fetus shall die; then deliver the fetus, as thou didst command, and command the woman not to move at all: thus shall she deliver easily. I command you that the patient keep his hand still, then bend it back and forward slightly; and lean it lightly.
And when it is even, if put on the fleshy elevation and oil, as we have said, then command that it move back and forth;.</start_of_turn>
When you have done this, if you make it sit on a seat, and command that it rest; it will discharge.</start_of_turn> The hairs that grow together often evacuate blood, never two or three at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, and often happens.
The hairs that grow together often evacuate blood, never two or three at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, and often happens. When force comes in this way throughout the second, if you press the second against your nail, as long as the moisture is drained out.</start_of_turn
and if it hangs on its face and on its neck, if you press the abscess, that it be discharged, and the patient dies.</start_of_turn
Then hold the child within, until you have set it as it should be; and instruct the woman that she must not move at all.
And if they depart abruptly, if the cure is as we have said, and the liquid be subtle, make haste and do what she makes; and do so with all your might.</start_of_turn> Hair that grows together comes out together; never in three or four at once This is not a strange thing, and often happens Two things are strange, and do not live long, if they are named;
Two things are strange, and do not live long, if they are named; I know that they multiply, and are consumed by the saliva that devours them, which is bound to the bowel
And never comes out naturally like one of us has said
And if it grasps firmly, if the treatment be as we have said, and let the limb move subtly, and do what it wills; and make peace as it deserves to be healed.</start_of_turn> When you cure a woman of a dead child or an empty womb, if she does not come to her senses, and you are constrained by the work of your hands; if you suspect that the woman is of sound mind, and has no accident or fears of death; if you suspect that the woman is conscious on her back, and her shoulders are slumped forward, and her legs are lifted; and you take hold of her hand, two fingers, or bind her to the bed if she is not being treated in the descent of the child; then smear the mouth of the jar with moist oil of marigold, with alum and fennel seeds, and linseed; then anoint her hands with these oils and these poultices; then put her in the jar lightly, and wait until she comes to or until you see her descend; if she descends in her eyes or in her nose or in her mouth or in her palace or on her beard or in her bosom or on her toes or on her heel or on her knees; and that she grasps or murmurs or sighs; and it is fitting that you keep the ointment at her right hand, and put the elbow between her two left hands, and hold her firmly with your left hand, and insert the ointment into none of the places that we have said, until it comes to the emptying of the thing. And this is the form of the ointment:
Sometimes they are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh degree, or more, up to the fifteenth degree; and they are all formed like a child by the measure of their glorious age, and it is necessary that the limb be set completely, for by chance some things will happen.</start_of_turn if you do as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
If some remains, if one sees some of its two oils, and puts them in that part, and treats the other part; and if there is still some remaining, if one puts this hair or higher up again, and does that until it is all gone.
When you cure the woman of her dead child or pregnant belly, as I have said in the division, and there is no escape, and you are constrained by the work of your hands.</start_of_turn If it is certain that the woman is of sound health, and has no accident or fears of death;
If it is certain that the woman is well on her back, and her arms flexed forward, and her legs raised;
and the minister should hold her hand at the level of the second part of the armpit, or bind her to the bed if she is not to be delivered of the child immediately.
Then wipe the mouth of the patient with warm oil mixed with alum and rue and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these poultices
Then hold her steady in the basin lightly, and command her to move or to move only when she feels a slipping sensation that she will descend onto her chest;
If the hair on the armpits, in the navel or in the mouth or on the chin or on the beard or in the mustache or on the ribs, and the swelling rises to the knee, the hair must be grasped or cut and the ribs must be fanned out.
And it is necessary that he hold the hair with his right hand, and put the elbow between his two left hands, and hold it securely with all his might, and grasp the hair in none of the places mentioned above, until it comes to the end of the matter
Then grasp another hair, or if you have to, take three together, so that the extraction is even
And then stretch them evenly by moving from side to side, so that the hair will break, and grasp the hair with teeth so that they hold, as it is said above.
And if it stays partly stuck, if one grasps a little of its oil from both sides, and put it in that part, and treat the other part;
And if it does not come loose, if one grasps some of its oil from both sides, and puts it in that part, and treats the other part; do this until it is entirely freed.</start_of_turn>
And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be pulled back by stretching, then you must cover the drape with your hand, until it is whole.</start_of_turn> Then grasp it at the joint of the limb or the bone, and then you must do the same in the other hand, and hold it.</start_of_turn
And if the child’s limb is thick and is twisted in extraction, or if there is a severe bruise assembled, then you must place the bony prominence between your two thumbs, and make the bruise and draw out the wound.</start_of_turn or thou shalt render it to the instrument which is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this.
and thus make it so that it naturally hangs down with great force.</start_of_turn>
and then stretch for the bones as tenacious, and if the head of the bone leaps and is strained by force, if it is fractured, until the moisture which is or comes out leaps out.</start_of_turn
and if it cannot rest, if the bone cracks piece by piece at the muscle that you put in place.</start_of_turn
and if it is placed in the belly or if you break the ribs, if you must know that you have pierced as much as the moisture comes out.</start_of_turn
And when you have done this, if what we have said concerning the aftercare is observed, that is, when blood comes in the marris; and if the bleeding does not cease, provide other treatments.
And if it is twisted in the belly or the wrist, it is right that you should pull it out with the drape that is wrapped around the hand. And pull the belly or the wrist, until the moisture that is in it is released
and if another limb is fractured, and the bone is displaced, if you see the limb limp with the hand immersed in mud, and treat it until the mud comes out of the wound then I anoint or II, and I pull it out forcefully
and if the wound of the mud is closed with stitches, if I cannot bear to move it, I must bring soft and fatty things; and apply poultices, and soak in soft and moistening water.
And if the fetus is on its cost, put it even, as we have said of the living child.
and if it does not prick, if its limb is torn out piecemeal, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
When you have done this, if it agrees with what we have said about the postpartum period, as is often the case in the marrow
and if blood comes out, if it be put in water to restrain it, and there are other treatments which must be given
I placed upon the wound a strong adhesive, and from it issued one bone, and afterwards several days another. I marveled greatly, for in this belly there is no bone
I thought that this was the bone of a dead child
I wish the wound, and in the armpits bones, to be long since the woman was in better health; and I saw the woman long tense with great pain; and this is often the cause of death. to bring the marrow back to its place
Then comes the form of the pressor, which is where we must read the books; and for this there are two returns of two limbs.
I will leave the wound, and with hands broken, until the woman is well again; and see the woman long tense in her limb, and this is a great evil to the body
And I have never seen this chapter except for the time when the master found an unusual thing, and he had to give aid.
Then comes the form of pressure, as we have read in books;
and at two returns as two heads of two limbs. However, the corners are more subtle than the restrictions, and are made of lead or brass;
and the mouth of the vessel must be wide enough, and the margin of the trees must be long, and long half a palm wide and between the two limbs there must be two nails of the same size as the vessel itself, which are closed in one and the other, half a palm long or more
And these two joints are loosened in the mouth of the marrow when two horns are twisted.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of the base of Ebony or Boxwood, according to the shape of the nails And has two thumbs two joints, as you see, of a long palm and two broad thumbs
When you see the marrow open with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit with her lip touching the lip, the pieces inside and the legs outside, then tighten the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs Then move your hand over all the instruments, as if you have made the nails even, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, until it stops when it feels what it wants
These instruments are all very sharp, and their resemblance is multiplied; When you behold them, their sharpness becomes evident; the more one sees them, the more haste there is for the work, and the greater the height of one’s home by their quantity.
If the secondine has a relapse.
When the second is retained in infancy, if you command the patient to retain its ala (breast), and then cause it to vomit forcefully, and strain your hands to the mouth and chin; and if it leaps for this, well done indeed
If not, I take a pot and make a perforation or incision, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the mare, like chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassia, and centaury All these herbs, or some of them, whether cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
Then put a caustic or lye in the pot, and the other head in the mouth of the cauldron, and hold it until vapor rises from the cauldron.
Then let it erupt, as we have said If one wishes to perform fumigations of consequence, it has not been proven that such fumigations with cresson and dried figs have been useful.</start_of_turn>
And if it remains after this treatment, and there is no more pain, as it is commanded by the dance, that she moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in alum, and then lay it in its place, and do the same with the other hand When she has found it, if she grasps it and stretches it forward and backward, so that the cauldron does not slip out during extraction
But it is ordered to move gently forward and backward, and then treat. if it comes and becomes loose.
And if the joint of the armpit is grasped, as has been said, the cure is to stop the bleeding and fumigate with herbs;
and if it is not from all that we have said, if you must treat, do not do so carelessly
but it is ordered that that which is at the joint of the armpit be bound to the hip of the woman, and then be closed with oil of four medications if it is grasped and returned, and comes back stronger;
but all this time, if there is a bad smell in the stomach and the head, and vomiting of the patient If it is necessary, then fumigations are convenient for this:
If it is necessary, then fumigations are convenient for this: none of the ancients have proved the efficacy of fumigation with rue and dried figs.
Many children are born who do not have a firm basis of understanding, and as soon as they are grasped, they are struck with a subtle stupidity: if you can therefore command the dance that she breaks that stupidity at its root, and do not prick her with any harsh punishment, and keep the dressing that she does not touch; then put on a soft cloth in wine and oil, and the cure of oil until it is healed
And it is like seeing a dog, and one puts on the head in the middle, and the large head above the fire;
or the fumigations above the charcoal, and the stench until it is consumed, and repeat another.
Many children are born who do not have the true foundation perceived, as they have been stifled by a subtle fever if it is necessary, then at the bath that it pierce that fever at its source, and do not pierce with a sharp object, and keep the opening that it does not touch
Then apply soft lint soaked in wine and oil, and then bandage the wound until it is healed.
Fistules that arise from below the foundation are nodules, and those that arise from above the foundation deviate, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or several; and when the nodulation is old, if the swelling persists, and is accompanied by moisture, mucus or blood, these fistulas never cease; and they are known by the patient when he makes an evacuation, or by the escape of gas.
And never comes this stamp of blood from wound or incision. if you cover this bloodstain. if it is well healed, as we have said previously of the root of the hair
Fistulas that arise from the root are nodulation, and blisters that arise from below the root are called deviation, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or several
and when that nodulation is old, if it recurs, and is accompanied by moisture or white or yellow pus, and never are these fistulas harmless
And they are known by that which he makes or egestion or vomiting whenever the patient makes egestion, and by chance he jumps up.
And if there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and reach half of the belly; reaching as far as the hip joint, and as far as the navel
And thus it is known when the fistula breaks at the root and does not remain unbroken: and that you bite your thumb or root and extract an awl of spider or iron from the fistula when there is no swelling
and if there is swelling, if you attempt to plunge an awl, or pull a hair, as long as you feel the attempt or the pull on your thumb;
And if you do not understand, and there is no loss of blood, no vomiting, no pain, no wind, as we have said. if they do not pierce me; then you must quickly cure it.
If the patient feels pain in the root of the limb, if you must bite your thumb, if you sense that the attempt has been perceived; or uncover or sense between your thumb the marrow or the bone, then take away that which is superfluous; for if it does not yield, it will not be healed
If it has been pierced up to the hip joint, if there is a vein running up to the limb; if there is no swelling and no sign of pain, if it is only slightly displaced, and there is no medicine or support that can be applied;
in such fistula there is no cure except toil, and the vanity of fools who interfere with it.
In the one that is not spontaneous and not ancient, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have shown, and that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
And he keeps his legs up to his buttocks, and has his buttocks leaning towards his belly. Then there is an attempt to stretch, or to plunge if there is swelling, until you feel or the attempt comes
If the patient feels it in the foundation, if you can drink your thumb and index finger, if you feel that the attempt has been perceived
Or that the nail or the bone be uncovered, or that you feel between your thumb and index finger the socket or the bone, then you must stop the attempt. If you do not stop it immediately, it will not heal
All these things can be done well without difficulty, but this is not the case here
and he should be supported there with the hand which grasps the cautery, as much as possible in proportion to the size of the fistula, as it is said above. and the thumb should be kept straight over the fistula, until it comes out from the foundation. do this two or three times, until you are certain that these hairs must be burnt, which are like a quill of an owl
and then cauterize the hairless skin with blunt tweezers, until the hair has gone, and then apply ointment to the wound, holding the hair back and closing the wound.
For the fire cautery, two things are assembled: namely, the burning of these hairy joints, and the incision of blood and the drying of moisture; then comes the treatment of soft bands bound firmly with thread or in pieces broken in half, as long as the bones groan and sweat; and it is best to leave the burnt hair in the wound; then treat the wound of the abscesses with dry sponges.
If this is done, nothing else will suffice;
and if he tries to go deeper and does not reach the root which is either the foundation or the bone, and between the two there is a thick covering of hair or fat, and you see the fistula at that which sustains the covering; If the head of the fistula comes loose at the start of the attempt, and remains in place before the cautery, and the cautery is performed afterwards, until it reaches the head of the attempt. and the attempt will be delivered, and the pain will cease.
then I command those who must carry the burden that appears like a feather of oil, and nothing remains of it
And if an abscess comes up to the root of the bone, and is loosened from the flesh, if it remains fixed to the bone or the root, inquire about it.</start_of_turn>
For the fire cautery consists of two bones together namely, the burning of these bones together, and the incision of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the cure of soft swellings embedded in burn or in broken flesh, until the bones sweat profusely, and is seen to burn the bones in the sweat
Then treat the wound of the oozing boils with charcoal that has been burned for a long time, and these are the dry medicines.
And never are fistulas like this: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs or breaks through the skin from below the leather above, take a bite pierced at the head like this.
And there is always a thread torn in two, and the attempt is held throughout the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If you feel the urge, and between two is the thread or the gut or charcoal, or it is close to bursting, if there is no other way but to flee and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you bind it tightly until it is healed, or if you wish, you can put on more pressure and treat it as before.
and do not go too deeply, that you do not cover the dwelling that holds the foundation, and let the discharge go in the natural direction; Then treat it as we have said
Then treat it as we have said By chance, if you are sound, or you loosen that covering and the mucus then that it is severed from its root, or by force or by any other pointed instrument. then take hold of that flesh that is in the wound, as you will; then study to restore the wound and to close the fistula at the back of the root:
then study to restore the wound and to close the fistula at the back of the root: if there is anything else that troubles the patient.
And never are fistulas like this method: when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either at the root of the skin or on the underside of the leather, if you take a needle pierced at the head like this form For indeed it is not right to force it too tightly with the clamp, and then cure it as we have said, while it is still healthy.</start_of_turn>
If it is grasped at the root of the foundation, then draw out the thread of that which has been pierced, so that you can swallow your tooth or foundation.
Draw out the head of the thread and reunite the two bones together, and strain one against the other, and leave it hanging for one or two days.</start_of_turn>
And do not hold it back at any time, until the thread has grasped these hairs which are between two teeth, and bites.</start_of_turn
Then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.</start_of_turn
Des emorroydes. Emorrydes sont selonc deux manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.
The shape of a spiky heel from which we make the fistula if it is moist and soft at one part and trenchant.</start_of_turn and on the other hand not, for this we must not grasp that which we must not grasp, as you see here.</start_of_turn
Wounds are of two kinds: Or else they are deep within the foundation, like grains of resin; and there are some that are small and some that are large, and in their course there is blood, and there is one or more of them, and they break through the foundation and the head of the foundation.
But those that break through have much moisture, and are accompanied by blood, or a drop of citrine urine, or blood, and are of a yellow color
and the cure for those who are within the foundation is that you command the patient to stretch out and rise to the chamber, as long as the foundations are forced out, and the nails are seen; if you are in a hurry, and you hold them with nails, or you hold them with your finger, then break them off at their roots.
If the shoulder blade is not held by its moisture, if you take it with a drape, or a bandage, or a piece of chamlet; if you pull it out, then hold it, and sprinkle upon it warm powders that will take the place of cautery. or you burn them if it is said or as the master of cautery directs, for the other cures are not as effective as when it is healthy
if the foundations cannot withstand it, if you bite the patient with a biting and rough plaster to uncover what is beneath, so that it can be healed openly cannot the patient bear it, and if the thread is strong enough to reach the foundation, if the cure is slight;
cannot the patient bear it, and if the thread is strong enough to reach the foundation, if the cure is slight; And it is that you grasp them at your nail or with tweezers, and you pull, then you cure as we have said, until it is healed, and that you fear the incision by fire. If it is known that you can restore the limb according to this method:
If it is known that you can restore the limb according to this method: I take a thread whole, and I pass it through a needle, and then I pass the thread under and make the needle pierce through the other side, and I twist two threads of the thread beside the needle, and if it is thick;
and I tighten the thread firmly, then I knot the thread, and I pull out the needle, and I make sure that all the other threads are secure; and I leave one to correct the excess blood
then I put on the foundation a soft bandage soaked in rose oil or beeswax, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
Then leave it [hair] until it sprouts, and when it has sprouted, if the cure for itching and other cures are applied, while he is still sane.
immediately. Formice is a small, prickly growth that appears before a boil, and goes out with much pain; and never does it cease to irritate, and it is felt as though dead from pain, and comes throughout the body, and there is no part that is not affected by it. If you can keep it at the point of a hair or at the nail’s edge, the crust that is under it will not leave it moist.</start_of_turn> Then leave the cure until it is healed if it can be kept.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot be healed, if you must repeat the shaving more strongly than before, while it is still moist, and be scraped off.</start_of_turn Then leave the cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if thou seest, if thou do this of a wasp or of iron in this fashion, and be silent and restrain thy hands: Formice is a small outgrowth that appears before the bone, and goes out like a thorn.</start_of_turn
And never did I see the true form of fear, when it sits so still like death, and comes into the whole body, and more than in any other part.
And if you take a goose quill or a strong vulture quill, and put that quill on the fear, as long as the circles of the fear swell the fear all around; Then turn your hand all the way around until you embrace the fear all around, and press it down firmly, and pull the fear out by its roots.
and be silent and restrain thy hands, do not perceive, for it must hold still, and press and if thou seest, if thou cauterize the edge, if it is before or alongside the cautery. I do not know, for I am holding two things at once, and I am pressing both.
And if you see, if you cauterize the fear, as it is before or the master of the cautery
Never make a blister of silver or gold, or of quicksilver or beeswax.
and never make a blister of these small and large things, as is fitting for the things to which they are applied. And let neither the medicine be too hot nor too cold; smear the chief with ointment of oil or balm of eggs, or something like that; then bind it loosely; then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is quite visible; then draw out the ointment, and leave the patient his legs exposed, and if the medicine sees that it is sufficient, if the swelling has subsided; and if he sleeps a whole night, that is more helpful.
And let neither the medicine be too hot nor too cold; smear the chief with ointment of oil or balm of eggs, or something like that; then bind it loosely; then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is quite visible; then draw out the ointment, and leave the patient his legs exposed, and if the medicine sees that it is sufficient, if the swelling has subsided; and if he sleeps a whole night, that is more helpful. If he limps with a disease of swelling of the belly, and the physician hasten to leave, if he returns as long as he is well.</start_of_turn>
and if there is a suspicion or the belly is tied, if you see it, and if you pierce it from the outside or from the inside
with two holes at one edge and one at the other edge
and put in the belly or on put on the medicines of a bladder of leather or parchment, and pierce all around the edges, and put between each hole one must of space, then put in these holes one strong thread of strong thread twisted in the shape of an X or around the edges, and assemble the belly as if it were a buckle And when the medicine is inside, if the thread has a strong instrument in front of it, then clip it.
It is like the shape of a circle.
Neither too hot nor too cold should the medicine be; oil or egg yolk, or something similar, should be added to the tip of the clip, and it should be bound lightly Then the physician should grasp his two hands together until the medicine is fully visible, and then withdraw the clip, and leave the patient with his legs exposed, and if the medicine wants to burst out, do so as much as it can; And if it sleeps all night, it is better
We have already mentioned the treatment of wounds in the previous section; or you may say the treatment of hands and medicine, according to their completion.
If the swelling is on the bone or the socket, or the abscess, the clip should be as fine as for a child;
And this is the form of a subtle blister which appears when the skin is stretched:
We have already said in the previous section the treatment of wounds.
or you may say the treatment of hands and surgery, according to the accomplishment.
If he does not recover, if he has lost his appetite, and does not drink wine or eat meat, take off the dressing, if there is any pus coming out, cover with soft wool soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no incision, if it is fresh with all its blood, and is not moved by air, dust, or anything else, I will tell you about it later; and if it has been moved, put on some bandages, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The things which are done for wounds are done by cutting with a stone, and the size of a spear or nail, or of an arrow or tube or sickle, or similar things; or there is doubt and fear, and many die.
or they are done according to the lessons of the physicians, as for example a wound which pierces the chin, or on the head, or the arm, or the belly, or the liver, or similar limbs;
And I will tell you the cure for a wound of the head, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come back to you in this chapter
I say that when a simple wound comes or a fracture occurs, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is not a fracture of stone or similar things, and the skin is thoroughly torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the depth of the wound: if you do not take care of it immediately, the blood that comes from the wound will go towards the head, and otherwise from the part that is distant;
and you will hear the patient groan with wine and fat food.
and if he does not recover, if he does not vomit his meat, and does not drink wine, does not eat bread;
put on a dressing for the wound, if the wound has burst, soak the wound with oil of roses only, or in styptic wine;
If there is no surrounding swelling around the wound, put a dressing on it while it is still fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by wind, dust, or anything else; I will tell you about that later.
If the wound has moved, put on some ointment, until it is healed.
And if these wounds are small and simple, if the cure is light: then put on this powder which hardens as soon as it is moved.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and is split open, and only hangs by a thread, if it be grasped; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as testicles and bread, as well as poultry, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
And if you find bone or rotten flesh, and it does not touch the bone, grasp it all and pull it out, then cure it.</start_of_turn>
If there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without support, and it cannot be held by medicines, if the artery is torn, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, suffice with gentle treatment: And put on this powder which will harden as soon as it is applied to the wound
The manner of application of the powder is: Take hold of a piece of the powder; blood of a dragon two parts; chalice of life three parts, and the powdered ochre sparingly, and apply the wound, and bind firmly, until it heals well and rejoins all its blood.
and then tie it well and let it hang loose, if it does not swell because one does not cure the medicine until it is healed.
of the wound of the neck
and if the wound has moved, even in this state, if one does not put on this powder;
but put on some ointments that digest, or poulps of oatmeal made of water and honey, until it emits pus; then treat it with other medicines until it is healed
And if a bone breaks with the wound, and it is small, if the extraction has punctures in small wounds;
And I shall tell you later about bone fractures.
And if the wound is great, if the pulse and veins are tied, then treat until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If the wounds are deep and swollen, with much pus, if the wound is pierced or lower down the limb; if the artery is severed, blood flows freely; if the bone is fractured, the marrow and the cautery mingle; if the wisdom tooth is pierced, or the cheek, and the tongue is held, because the meat hangs there; and then tighten the wound gradually, and leave it alone for a while, then cure it with ointment until it is healed; if the wound has made an impression in the bone, if there are pieces of bone, if the fragments are numerous, do not attempt to remove them all; leave as many as possible, and let the wound heal naturally; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with powder as I have said.
If there is no other injury, except to leave the wound open, and not to put anything restraining, because it hinders the wound and makes it shrink and do not put anything rough on the wound, because the substance of the wound is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the brain, which is the most severe part of the body
but if there is any medicine that you wish, such as warm water with sweet oil, and mixed with rose oil, and vinegar washed in sweet water, and other stones of this kind, and moist ointments.
Of wound by lance or knife.
And if the wounds are deep and closed and full of pus, if the hole or lower part is deeper;
If the artery is severed and blood flows out, if the pus, blood clots, and cautery mix together.
If the rib of the chest is fractured, or the spleen or intestines are cut, and the blood vessels are held together, if the meat goes over the spleen on the chest bone, do not touch the chest but move it back to its natural position. Then the pain will subside, and leave it alone for a while, then treat the wounds with ointment until they are healed;
If the wound has caused an indentation in the bone, if the marrow is soft; And if there are bone fragments, if the wounds burst forth entirely, do not attempt to remove them; rather leave them until the wound has healed, and keep the fractured bone aligned.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder I have mentioned.</start_of_turn> Cure the tension of the tendons and other cures, as long as he is sane; and if it cannot heal, and if it is necessary, remove the bones that have fistula; as the treatment requires.
If there is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound is open to the wind: the patient must lie down. otherwise the wound is deadly.</start_of_turn
and if it is not deep and is fresh throughout, do not put anything on it for the first hour; do not bind it up with the dressing until it has stopped bleeding. Then remove the dressing and comfort the patient.</start_of_turn But I put on an attractive weight, and I bind it twice with a thread.
And if you have no weight, put on a great deal of cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more If there is no spasm, do not tremble or strain your body excessively; When you see the bones displaced, if you have soaked the wound sufficiently Cure it then with bandages and other treatments, until it is healed;
And if it does not heal, and there is discharge, soak it until there is a fistula
As it should be done in this case. And if the wound is from a cut or a knife, and it is simple, or more so on the front or at the back, if the treatment of the one in front is enough; if it is great, it requires stitching.</start_of_turn>
and if it is small, it is with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and has split pieces, if the wound is deep, and the surrounding tissue is bruised.</start_of_turn if they are not bruised, leave the wound alone, if you align the extractions.</start_of_turn
and for other wounds, the judgment is as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And when it is cold, soak the area slightly: moisten a sponge or lay a wet cloth on it only, or pour on in boiling water squinching and scraping, and draw out the intestine as much as the swelling allows; and never do this without first restraining it, for it is useless to do so when the swelling has subsided.</start_of_turn>
The pain of the belly is great, medium, or small.</start_of_turn
From a great wound no time does the intestine depart, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the introduction of foreign matter.
The wound is more severe, and never is it better than the small wound than the great, because in this way we must return the intestines further inwards, if we do not return them gradually.
Therefore, when the intestines swell so much that they feel the pain, if we return them inwards more forcefully, it is worse than a minor wound, for in this way we must keep the intestines at their place rather than pushing them inwards as before
And the stitches that are pulled out of the belly are done in three ways:
The common stitches are made in the belly stitch, and the stitches of the other wounds are made of horn and two other stitches are common to other wounds.
And thus they are all the more clean with a belly stitch, and I shall say a word and declare.
I say that when the wound is small and there is nothing of the intestines inside, and the gut is tense, two things must be done: either by the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the fruit.
And when it is cold, draw up the limb somewhat: moistening a sponge or I wrap it in cold water only, or you will burn in cold water spitting and spurting and pricking, and elevate the intestine until the swelling is bony;
and do not make this wound strained, and be still that we may see how it swells.
And when you see swelling depart, if the acute intestines are swollen or elevated and cooked badly, for by that is the entrance to many things aligned.
and if it cannot enter, if there is a wound in the instrument with which one grasps the haemorrhoids, it is to be coped with the wound open.</start_of_turn>
and the first treatment is to make it immobile that the size, that one must not cut excessively without great necessity.</start_of_turn
and this is the instrument for cutting.</start_of_turn
if it breaks from the shoulder and does not go out, and when this is the form.</start_of_turn I will return the intestine when it has been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound will be closed after fifteen days. The cure was successful and the patient recovered.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, if one must make the patient sit up on his back and lift his legs higher than his head.</start_of_turn If it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and the heel higher than the lower parts; and if the curvature of the belly is in one of the two lower parts, put your hand over that which is higher.
And thus it is necessary to apply what I have said in great and moist wounds.
Small wounds put that which appears to be there, and then take hold between your hands, I minister pity that holds the whole curvature with its hand, and gather the layers together
This is the common method of stitching, and you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the wound’s size, then leave the head of the wound free for a space, and pierce a needle or there is good strong thread; And pierce the two shoulders with the two thumbs, which is to say to split the skin from the inside, as much as you make the pierce from that part, and reunite the two thumbs with the three fingers together.
Then strain a double thread around the needle of two parts, then reunite the two thumbs of the wound following, and then leave one space, and insert another needle;
Then bind the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so until you have made as many needles as you have seen necessary, until the wound is completely restrained.
And let the needles be neither too thick nor too thin, because the thin needles will tear all the flesh, and the thick ones will not penetrate properly For this reason it is advised that they be blunt.
and it is not advised to push the needles too far beyond the hair and skin, as they may tear and open the wound before the suture is complete.
and then hold the head of the needles still so that it does not bleed the patient at rest, and put on a bandage or dressing on the head of the needles to hold it, and leave it until the wound is healed
and this method of stitching with needles is more manageable in small wounds, because there is a needle or two left over.</start_of_turn>
The second suture is common, and is that you join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the tissue together with a needle or with one strong middle thread.</start_of_turn
And when you have perceived these things altogether, if you rejoin the needle at the part where you began, in the manner in which you cut the threads.
And put an interval between each stitch the thickness of a small bean
This stitching will secure the home, and I sew a wound where there was a wound before, which was caused by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm of great, and there were intestines well two palms of great, and the wound was in the belly.
The second method of stitching, which Galiens does with great care, if it is done without violence, which joins the two parts naturally, and brings one chief close to the other chief, in this manner: pierce with a needle or the chief of a nearby splinter, and pierce only the lower part, and leave the two chiefs of the splinter; then withdraw the needle, and pierce from the lower part until it reaches the centre, having two chiefs of the splinter; then pierce one and the other from the lower part until it reaches the centre, in two other splinters which are on the other side; and this is the wisest method of stitching and the most common.
And the blood had been vomiting that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not care for it, for I was in a place where there was no physician, no medicine; And the method for more than that is to apply a poultice of wool twice a day, and to wash the wound with honey until it is healed.
Or you may say the two proper methods of stitching:
Take the needle and pass it from the underside up to the underside again;
When it has pierced the mark straight, if the thread slips or breaks or you have passed the needle, and you must pierce again from the underside of the part downwards until it reaches the underside
And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew just as the leatherworker does the skin, and that you leave once the hair of a side, and you take hold of the other side, until the stitching is complete
The second method of stitching, which Galiens does very well, is if there is no break in the substance of the tissue, which naturally joins the two parts together, and joins one of the chiefs to the other chief in a partial manner.
Stitch with a needle or chief from the neighbouring part, and pierce only the latter, and leave the two chiefs of the tissue; Then turn the needle and pierce from the underside until it reaches the middle, as there are two chiefs of the tissue left over
And pierce the other two from the underside until they reach the middle, in two other needles which are on the other side
And that is the most discreet and common method.
Hairs if distant this word, and no witness, we must suture the belly with two needles, or there must be thread in the hem.
and must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who suture wounds
and the stitches that when the swelling is in the belly, if the suture is greater than others in the belly
The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds:
and when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, if you stop the intestines and the gut
then put on the healing powder charcoal, and if it has moved, put on no other ointment except for what is present, until the wound is healed. And the thread bites, and the soldering is rough, and the burn; Then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicine, if you put on it, until it begins to swell, cotton wool, and move it twice a day until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
For you must not have any other medicine except in many other situations where wounds are simple.</start_of_turn>
and if you doubt that the wound will not heal properly, you must moisten the principal parts with coarse linen soaked in warm oil of poppy, or rose oil, and put it on the wound, and bandage it.</start_of_turn
And if he feels pain or swelling in his bowels, and this happens many times, if the cluster of black wine helps, and even if the swelling comes up to the intestines.
And the pain that comes from the spleen, and the swelling that is in the large intestines, if it is lighter to heal than the small intestines
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in little pieces, for I have seen that one bone has burst from a wound or the belly of a lance; and the wound was at the stomach, and became filled and became a fistula, and in this there was evacuation and vomiting; I cured it according to what I could, and I did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the limb was straightened.</start_of_turn>
And if the spleen bursts from the wound, if it is reset backwards like the intestines while they are fresh;
And if it is black and becomes yellow or dark, if you must know that you must bind the black part, because there are veins and arteries there;
Then grasp what is between the ribs, and put the two thumbs hanging from the side of the wound until the spleen is expelled, and the wound is aligned
If the chief is burned in the intestines, and there is no nuisance to the patient, and it can be ligated with a fine silk thread which is cut from the intestines of a beast, in parts. Take the head of this silk intestine which is already detached, and then ligate to the head of this silk one thread of fine silk twisted, and pass the thread through the needle, and suture the intestine, and keep it in its place; and this manner of stitching with tweezers is not fierce except according to the way of love and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, as it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no danger or infection, except for subtlety.
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if one wishes to restore it in the homes of the ribs, for I have seen that one bone has been shattered or the belly of a lance.
And the wound was at the side of the stomach, and became filled and turned into a fistula, and in this there was vomiting and diarrhea.
I put them to cure as I could, and did not cease to apply remedies until they were healed, and the wound closed.</start_of_turn>
And when I saw them closed, I doubted that the patient would not have a bad feeling in their belly.</start_of_turn and there was no more pain, but remained in better conditions, food and drink.</start_of_turn
And they say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be liased in a moderate degree. And take forceps from great tests, then join the lips of the wound, and when the forceps has opened the mouth, if it has gone over the two lips, if it pulls its mouth over the two lips, so that it strains its mouth over
and then hold the head, and this will be kept if it cannot be undone, and put another forceps afterwards in that manner that before, until the wound is completely closed. Close the wound.
When it bursts in the intestine, and there is no further nuisance to the patient, and it can be liased with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine itself, in a moderate degree.
Take hold of this thread of intestine that is already discharged, and then bind the head of this thread to the first thread of linen that is finer, then stretch the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and hold it in place.
And this manner of stitching these threads is not strong except according to the way of the vein and the hope;
And if the wound is great and wide, even if it is in one of the intestines, if there is nothing to do, except for slightness
Or I must tell you the cure for fistula, which is made by the work of the hands. Wounds that arise in all members with pain; for there are wounds that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the jaw, or the intestine, or the bladder, or at some of the bones, or at the spinous process of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet; and if part comes to the property of the main limb, and the rest.
A fistula is according to truth a nodulation that must be firm and white, or there is no pain, and it is as strong as the quill of a bird
It sometimes appears clear and sometimes thick; Never once, and sometimes quite enough;
Never once, and sometimes quite enough; and as I have mentioned previously in the chapter on wounds, every wound that is not healed must be suspected of having one of the seven deadly causes. namely, by the smallness of the blood or bone or by its wickedness; ou par la brûlure de feu; ou par la violence de la plaie; ou par le mouvement des os; ou par la mors du sang; ou par le mouvement des fibres; ou par la dessication du corps. or because there is a hard growth inside and on the liver, that does not allow new growth to take place or there is too much bile. or the blood is thickened, and the material is of bad quality; ou par la froideur du corps; ou par l’excès de nourriture; ou par le mouvement des liens; ou par le mouvement des esprits. Or the physician is not skilled in the cure; Or because the corruption is like the cause of pestilence. Or because in the region there is a late digestion and a late recovery of health, and it flees by nature; Or there are veins or bones:
and I have already mentioned these causes, signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
If the vein or major arteries are not obstructed, neither the bones nor the principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is broken, and there is corruption and blackness, if the marrow is whole as long as the corruption is of bone only, then heal the fractured bones with warming compresses until they are healed; and if they are not healed, bend them as before, extract the bone fragments until they are gone; if the fracture is complete, and when it is completely healed, restore the limb to its original position.
Sores that form in all limbs with pain in the bone because there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the bone, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spin of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; If part of the limb comes to the property of the main limb, and there are similar symptoms.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of great suffering and healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance.
And if there is no fistula that does not come out only as I have said, and you have promised healing, and you see it proceeding, if you take an attempt to drain or cauterize, if the fistula is straight, if not;
And if the fistula is tortuous, if a subtle attempt to drain it causes the swelling to rise around the curvature;
And if the fistula has holes and you do not manage it well with attempts, if you listerize it through one of the holes, because moisture is short from one hole to another, and it swells up.
Then when the shoulder joint is grasped firmly, you must know if there is a bone or nerve involved, and the limb is firmly bent inwards; ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and where exactly.
And when you truly know where it is, if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or any other bones that I have mentioned, if the limb can be repositioned as I have said, then force the fracture and the corrupted humors that are inside
Then leave it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well formed, if you can reposition the limb as you wish, then put gentle pressure with medicine, and keep it tight until the medicine dissolves the surplus that is left at the bottom
Then I put on gloves of silk, so that they are clean;
And if they are not clean by this, if I cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by fistula, if I grasp it.</start_of_turn>
If the vein or nerve does not give you pain or the principal limbs, as we have said.</start_of_turn
And if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, if the limb remains as long as the corruption is all bony, then I will treat it with the aforementioned silk gloves until it is clean.</start_of_turn
And if they are not clean, and return as before, I will say that you are not going away until you are clean.</start_of_turn
If you discover and desire as much as you are at the bottom, and break all corruption, then restore the limb.
and if it is now sound, that is good.</start_of_turn> If not, say that the corruption is too great, that you will not be able to do anything about it.</start_of_turn if there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature.</start_of_turn
and if there is a small bone that is corrupted, and you attempt to remove it with forceps, if the extraction is done with a suitable instrument and if there is any remaining bone, do not leave it behind.</start_of_turn
and if moisture opposes you, and there is no risk or fear, if you grasp and hold moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.</start_of_turn
And if you do not restrain them at an hour, if you put something above the wound that engenders corruption, and leave them as long as the wounds are raw around the bones, then they will have less pain in the bones.
If it is a large bone, such as an arm or leg, if you leave the corruption so long as the marrow is entirely ossified, then restore the wound.
And if there is a great part of corruption, and it comes up to the marrow of the bone; then you must cover it and cover all until the corruption is gone, and then cure it until it is healed
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a woman in her leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
He was once a young man of thirty years, who had a pain in his leg from a cause within the body, as the things came to the leg, and fled from a great abscess, and had no other cause to fear by opening;
but he remained mad from his folly to open as much as the abscesses, and in corrupting much matter, and became fistula, and there came forth much pus that all the bones and moisture of the body were given over.</start_of_turn>
and remained mad for two years, and there was no sense in the art of healing, as far as I remember, and went away from his leg and the medicines which they were using, and what was causing it through the pus at great pain.</start_of_turn and his skin became red like blood, and had the color of citrine.</start_of_turn>
And if the bone is broken in no part of the limb, if you must bind it in this manner: take one thread and stretch it at the head of the bone which breaks, and command no one to lengthen it upwards; and put another thread of linen thicker than the first one on the other side of the bone, and bind it over the scale which is detached from the bone, and stretch the head, so that you tear the corrupt scale away from the bone, and uncover the scale on the limb or where you see it is bound; and put a cushion or a piece of gauze under the bone to cover the corrupt scale, and bind as much as you can see and feel the corruption, and bind once more.
I have done the same, and I found in one of the holes as much as I could uncover a part of the bone, which I found corrupted and putrefying, and it went as far as the marrow inside.
I saw that which appeared to me from the bone corrupted, and I thought that there was no other corruption except that which I saw;
and I began to restore the wound with various medicines, so that it should not fester
and then I repeated it, and I found the bone just as before, and I saw the corruption continuing in the bone, and I cured it, and then I left it, and I worried about restoring the limb but I could only do that until I found a palm of the bone, and I was forced to take it out completely, and I restored it with medicines And he became sane and joyful again, and did not wish to continue the work for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for fear of death which I avoided for him. fire
And if his bone is broken in any limb, if you can bear in this manner: I take it [the limb] and strain it at the head of the bone that breaks, and command that no one extends it further up and put another layer of linen more thick than the first layer, and tie it on the flesh that comes out of the bone, and stretch the head, so that if you pull the corrupt flesh away, you uncover the bone above the limb or where you see it is being bound, so that the hair does not stain the linen;
And put I a sponge or a ball of toweling soaked in oil over the bone to cover the corrupted flesh.
And cover so well as we can see and feel the corruption, and cover again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, if you uncover the flesh entirely;
then put I a sponge soaked in oil, and then cover from one side to the other the corruption, and be the sponge long as the corruption itself as we have said
and if the corruption is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint, and cover the bone or what it contains on the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other vessel but to cover it.
And if the corruption is from the hand or from the foot, if it is strong in that matter, but all the same you must inquire about that corruption, how it appeared to you. And keep the body in all ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you
And the nails that are cut into the bones are many, according to the size of the bones and the appearance of swellings, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to appear suspicious of the work of the instrument
And the nails that the work will show you the instrument from which you will be in need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manner of diseases If you ponder the instrument which you must employ according to this, it is certain.
The head of the shoulder may be dislocated due to moisture, or by tension, or by violence;
When you have treated the inflammation with medicine, but it does not help, if you can cover that limb up to the root of the dislocation or if the inflammation comes back, so that the patient escapes by this means from death, or by malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb
and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if burned by fire, and afterwards comes the blackness, for that inflammation of the limb consumes the limb piece by piece, and takes hold of the whole body
if you hurry to cover it up, and if there are venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and the like, if the inflammation is at the top of the arm, if you can cope with it, and do not give it space to come down to the hand
And if it comes up to the hand, if the nail has slipped from the joint, so that the cortex does not reach the arm;
And if it comes up to the arm, if the nail has slipped from the cuticle;
and if it passes the cuticle, that is death, and nothing but the quantity of its force is of any avail.
and thus do all the things when the cortex comes or the bone is affected. if it comes in the first joint, if the nail follows the other joint;
and if it comes with the bone, if the nail grasps all the bone and if it reaches the forearm, if the nail has slipped from the joint of the elbow
And if it comes from below the knee, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die;
And if it comes from below the knee, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to die; then grasp the limb with a cloth or bandage and stretch out one finger of the lower limb and another finger of the upper limb, and divide the flesh between the two fingers at a one-inch interval, until the bone is exposed.
Then grasp the limb with a cloth or bandage, and put a cushion under the drape of linen, so that the bandage does not touch the sound limb, and cause the patient other injury and incision
And if blood comes out when you work, if you cauterize the limb urgently, or put on some restraining powders;
Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb securely with a strong ligature, and cure it until it is healed.
And I will tell you that there is often at home in summer:
there was a black bile that seemed to burn like fire, and that corruption came first in its belly towards the heel, as it burned all the flesh
when the host saw the corruption, if he covered the flesh and it healed;
and long after it returned the corruption or the heel of the foot, and he came to me, and I put things that would impede the corruption after the purification of the wound; but the corruption did not cease
and he told me that I should cut off the limb, and I did not wish to give him any hope of recovering the matter And I doubt that if I cut off his hand, he will die, for the strength of the man is weak.
And he awoke suddenly, returned to his land, covered his hand with a cloth, and was healed;
I only heard of this story because of what we are about to do
Blood often comes out in the course of a vein, and it lingers for such a long time that it makes a great swelling Then it runs back and breaks, and the blood spurts out, and swells up the veins like vessels The skin that is under is as thin as a bandage, and does not reach the bone or the nerve, and such diseases are called "sain" and not "fistula".
But if it is so elongated that it reaches the bone under the skin, it is called a fistula.
and the wound if it is closed with such force that it tears the skin around, and even when it is subtle, like a drape.</start_of_turn> and does not heal by itself.</start_of_turn>
And if you have sewn that the skin is healed, and the corruption is not in the depth, and the skin is thick like leather, then the treatment of the fistula is as follows:</start_of_turn
look if there is pus, and if it has a foul odor, then apply Egyptian medicine plaster which is made.</start_of_turn take alum, oil, and beeswax, equally, and mix the wound with these ingredients in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey.</start_of_turn
And then take according to your need, and make it acute and mellow, and in clinking the belly, and restrain the part. And leave the medicine in place for two hours, then remove it while expressing.
Do this several times, until the belly is soft and the pain is gone
Never clench with acute water, when this medicine is not present; take wine of must, vomit, and discharge, then clench until you are certain that the belly is well healed
If the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of vinegar, if you clench with water and honey or if there is a little bit of blood; Or you anoint it with honey and wine mixed together, for the honey has the property of softening and washing away, and the wine makes the wound dry.
And when you have done this, and you have secured that the wound is well softened, if you anoint it with what has been said to make new flesh appear, and take away the crust with oil of rose and wine.
Or you anoint it with some medicines and poultices, of which I have spoken of the properties or treat with poultices;
And if the wound has opened in the flesh and the dressing will not enter, if it has been caused by a sharp object, put in a patch of Egyptian or basilon ointment until it is enlarged
If the wound is too wide, if the edge and the skin leave too much slack, the clot or pus can enter; and if it bursts that the blood vessel is below, if the head or more downwards than it should be.
and if you do not cover the wound sufficiently as you see, if it appears in this manner: the blood vessel will run to the lowest point, because when the blood vessel is pierced, if it does not leave the edge clean, and if you do not cover the wound sufficiently as you see, if it appears in this manner: it runs lower down and does not leave anything of the blood vessel behind.
it runs lower down and does not leave anything of the blood vessel behind. and take solidifying medicines to put out the blood, and extend over the bandage of linen that covers all the wound. Then grasp as firmly as force allows the protruding part within, since it is extended over another layer according to the quantity of the protrusion, and put it over the protruding part of the sound limb to align the socket, and do not remove the great flap until after maintaining the joint once.
And he who is outside the protrusion within often supports the socket, and pulls out the socket of that which is between the socket and the protruding part, if it is venom or blood or enough, or digested or indigestible.</start_of_turn>
And take care that the patient does not feel pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine has reached its limit extent and you see the nature that the swelling is on the protruding part of the sound limb, if the socket has already gone away, and approach calmness.</start_of_turn
Then take off the dressing in the morning, or in the evening; and when you remove the dressing, if there is another layer of gauze, change it and renew the dressing.
Panarice is an abscess which arises from the swelling of a pouch of the hand, or the foot, or by chance arises in other places; and when it is envious, and one does not take care, if it comes there will be a running abscess, and it will break and discharge pus until it reaches the root of the swelling, and by chance it will break all the way; and there comes the corruption up to the bone, so that there is sharp pain, and the head of the abscess is large, and the color is yellow.
For there are some who are late in their eating and drinking in their wounds, and those who do the opposite
and if they eat indigestively, salt remains in their stomach after a meal; the saliva does not flow properly
if their stomachs are late in digesting, and are swollen, if you give them medicines that are dry in substance and moist in effect, such as diaphnetine, because there is a great part of vitriol in it, that is the last medicine.
take diaphnetine and make it with rose oil, and the rose of vitriol is equal in substance
Then rest it and use it.
And the same thing makes honey sweet, when once it has finished burning, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and broil them, and sprinkle it over the honey when it comes out of the fire.
Then I will bind it with a bandage, and stretch it out of the chest, and never let an experienced physician remain there for a long time, or roots of lilies celestial, which is as coarse as flour at times and a hundredth part of the time In use of simples or compounds: Grind them, and make powder of them, and sprinkle it on the honey that I mentioned before, and use it
And if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then its flesh is softened by the corruption, and makes an imprint in the bone, or makes the limb stiff, or causes the limb to swell If the surgeon of the fistula cure, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises from the root of the thumb, or the heel of the hand, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it is inflamed, if care is not taken, if it comes to an abscess of the nails, it tears and breaks as much as it tears the root of the nail, and sometimes it tears the nail entirely
and comes the corrosion up to the bone, as much as there is severe pain, and the head of the shoulder is large, and the color is pale
The pain of the hand comes from the wrist. The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy
If at any time the thumb suddenly catches on the nail and starts to bleed, if you can manage it, put a little of the right ointment on the nail where the thumb touches it, and leave the rest of the nail exposed, and gently push it up, and remove the clot secretly and mildly, and put on the remaining part of the nail some medicinal ointment that is oily and corrosive to remove all. Then treat the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the corrosion is in the bone, if you remove it, and break, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.</start_of_turn
If you see the bone fractured, if you break it out if it is before mentioned, then treat it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If he is fierce, and spitting, and feels great pain, if it is suspected that the dislocation has occurred for a long time, then you must first restrain him.
Then hold the arm tightly at the elbow with a cut across the front, and guard that the cut does not reach up to the armpit, because the patient would feel too much pain;
and if there is movement, put something over it that will ease the pain
In him who is born or must behind a back pain, if you must, first grasp the flesh round the bone until the bone is level with the surrounding flesh, then grasp the bone at a convenient place like that, and hold it until it is healed
This thing that is born without noise must not move, and that which is born at the joint must by chance move;
The size of that which is fleshed is light in part, in this way: cut the breadth of a large elbow
He who is born at the root of the jointure if he is grieved must be cured. if you keep him covered.
When the swelling comes from neither of its two ends with the palm, if you can restore the dislocation if it is possible.</start_of_turn>
Des vils
If you can cover that scab, so that it must repair according to its natural form; then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, that it does not stick; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as it is glued together, if it can be covered.</start_of_turn>
It is therefore necessary that you do not give any purgatives, and then repeat the poultice.
The veins are large vessels covered with thick phlegmas containing black bile, which come in abundance with many diseases of the limbs.</start_of_turn
and more often appear in those who go to bed and work and travel, than in others.</start_of_turn>
The ailments of the limb are thus: open the limb of the patient, if there be hair, then put or bathe it in hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins; and if you have no bath, if the patient is able to bear the heat of the fire, then burn the hair at the root of the limb, or in the part below the ankle; then cover the skin with ointment, and press the limb from the ankle downwards until it feels relaxed; and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white thread; then remove the hair from below, until it is freed from the skin, and then apply ointment lightly, and press it in another place nearby; then burn another size, or several if necessary, and when you have finished, remove the hair from the root and draw it out, until it is all gone; and if you do not manage to draw it out and it remains firmly embedded, then there is a splinter at the end of the hair, and you must grasp and draw it out, and there will be blood at the root, and wipe your hand with a part and with the other, until it is gone; and keep it still, for if you move it, you will not be able to draw it out or lift it, and this will cause harm to the patient; and when you have finished, put out the limb of the wound with clean wool and oil of roses and cure it until it is healed.
The fire cautery is as follows: instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. one is with the nails, and treat the black blood or the other method is to ligate the vein, and treat it all forcefully.</start_of_turn>
The size is as this method.</start_of_turn rise first the hot water bag firmly, until the big one is not split, and strain the limb of the patient from below the hip bone to the part below the knee.</start_of_turn
then ligate the vein in one, or two, or three, of a large size, and cut and treat the black blood from your hand from one armpit to the other, until there is as much pain as the patient can endure.</start_of_turn
Then he must lie down, and he is commanded to hold meat in his mouth, biting black garlic.
And he begins the evacuation and the bleeding again when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
The treatment for this is as follows: Release the limb of the patient, if there is hair, then put it in water, and elevate the limb with warm water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if there is no water, if you burn with fire, then put it in the place of the vein from the shoulder to the elbow, or from the ankle to the knee
then apply leather to the wound, and support the vein from the inside, until it appears when you feel it
And on see it red and black, and when it enters or leather seems just like a white thread.
Then stretch the skin downwards, until it is level with the leather, and then prick with the needle lightly, and then press in the sponge immediately into the third part;
Then pull the leather up over the vein until it appears, then remove the needle as you did before, and prick again at another puncture point as you did before;
Then insert another size, or more if you wish, and press down, and remove the thumb and index finger, and grasp firmly until the second size
Then pull out the size by size until it is gone, and then press down again
If you do not handle it and lift it, if there is a needle at all its full length doubled, grasp it and pull it out, and there will be a discharge of blood, and twist your hand from one side to the other, until it is gone. Keep it still, for if it swells, if you cannot pull it out or lift it, there will be harm to the patient;
When you have finished with it, put the limb into a wound filled with fine wool soaked in wine and oil of roses and bandage it until it is healed.
If it is contracted and tortuous, and surrounded together, and is not straight, as we have said, if you must force it open, but do not cover it up And thus it is with us, as we have said before.
The shape of fire from which we take hold of the limb is crooked, and does not bend inwards, but only outwards, that it does not tear the vein.</start_of_turn>
It is of great curvature, for if it were slight, it would tear the vein, but being large as we have said, this is its shape.</start_of_turn
This vein lies in the limb, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in the earth where there is no moisture.</start_of_turn
And by chance it happens elsewhere than in the limb, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from the decay of the skin, as it comes from the belly of the serpent and towards, enclosed between the skin and flesh.</start_of_turn
And never has this vein hands rained, even when it opens in the elbow or on the wrist, and it comes from bursting blood; cure it therefore as we have said before.
When the arm is dislocated, if you know that you must wrap around an escutcheon from one and a half inches to two and a half inches, and hold the thumb, and leave the escutcheon on the limb, and every time that it points downwards, if you wrap around the escutcheon and the thumb, hold the thumb.
and if it is too long, if you split a part, and wrap around the rest, do not cover it in its root, until it is completely healed; for if you cover it, if it returns to the bone, it brings about swelling and pain or weakness, and makes the disease worse.
therefore it is necessary that it should be treated immediately and without delay until it is completely healed, and that nothing remains or hardens
And never has this vein been treated with five palms of length, or with ten, that one should arrive already at me, from ten palms of length; and when you grasp it, if there is one hair or a wound, and the blood runs to the end, so that all is gone.
Or let out the material that is within, and bring in medicines that are soothing, to prevent any pain, and then treat it as with incisions.</start_of_turn>
And never has this vein hands rained, and even when it bursts at the shoulder joint, or at the elbow, and blood comes out broken; and from that it leaps.</start_of_turn
Treat it then as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
When you see it cured and treated, if you cannot force it out, then do this: bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature, then press above and push down firmly; and if it does not come out, if you cauterize the fire above, until it dies; and the greater harm it does is if it runs into the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, tear out its hair above, then press above and push down; and you must use the patient of the application of solid medicines for the bad humors carried, and give him nourishing food. This disease is called in our land "bullous disease", for it often happens after boils, and is a small wound which originates between skin and flesh, and runs throughout the body, ascending and descending, and the patient feels it quite acutely from limb to limb, as long as the skin is stretched or when it is pulled, and even jumps out.
and is accompanied by the discharge of various humors, such as veins, serums, bile, and worms or intestines
and there is doubt about its malice, for when it runs through the body and ascends to the head, and comes to the navel, by chance it returns, and destroys the oil and this often happens.
When you see it cured and treated, if one cannot force it except when it is going away:
If it is certain, then bind up the limb above and below with a strong thread, and press upon it above and below, and if it does not move, if the fire cautery is applied above, until it dies.
And the greatest damage that it makes is when it bursts the oil, as we have said before.
If you see it coming or near the oil, grasp the edge and press above, and pull downwards;
And it is proper to use the patient various applications of poultices and medicines that dissolve bad humors caused by dampness, and to feed him nourishing food that is not rotten.</start_of_turn>
I wondered how he managed to move about without wanting this sickness in this way.</start_of_turn> This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and is a pain that comes in spasms of the limbs, and because it moves from limb to limb.</start_of_turn>
And I bear witness to that which I have told you. And I saw a woman who was sick, and I discovered a small swelling in her armpit;
and I saw her arm rise up like a worm to her shoulder, more swollen than anything, as if there was gold inside when it struck the bone of the other side
the pain went away from that limb and settled in the shoulder, and then a little while later it was corrected throughout the limb as far as the other arm
then she told me that she often twisted her arm back towards the bone, as I saw her do it.
When you see the cure of this ailment, and the patient feels that pain, if it bursts like we have said, if the liquid above and below has become inflamed, then support above as much as that constraint of the liquid inside is strong; and cauterize the liquid; and if you do not see it at your eyes, if the cure for that which releases the constraints, like foul pills, and pills of serpin, and similar things. However, I do not wish to maintain that she was not experiencing pain in her limb, but I do not wish to lie, as I saw her do the same thing in the woman
And I thought that this was the cause of that woman's dry skin, uncovered veins, and that constrained windiness.
And I do not find that this is the reason for these things that are pleasant, and that have moist skin and veins that are full again.
When you see that this illness is cured, and the patient feels this pain, if she tells you that when it happened previously, the windiness was intense, and then ceased as soon as that constrained windiness disappeared from her; then cauterize the limb.
and if you do not see that at your eyes, if he cures her of that which brings on the windiness, like foul pills, and pilules of serpin, and similar things.
When the sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces the bone, and blood spurts from the opening above the brain, this is when scraping and soiling and vomiting and shivering and redness of the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of senses, vomiting of bile; and by chance without a wound of the nose or ears; or by chance loss of speech and voice; and spurting of white moist blood resembling pus, and in spitting also like brown hair; and if this sign appears, if you delay treatment, take out the arrow if it is not deeply embedded.</start_of_turn>
The variety of their points is such that some have great peaks, others have small, and some have ridges and sockets. and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces of bone sticking out.
and those that break in no limb break in two ways: or in the main bone cracks, as with the skull, forearm, shoulder, hip, ribs, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it breaks in no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you: that you must beware of the extraction of this splinter, for death comes after in various positions. And when this sign is absent, I do not perceive it; and the bandage is not mine in such a case. If the wound is treated, and the wound is cured.
And the sign of the cerebrospinal fluid when it breaks and pierces the bone, and leaps up the blood which is above the brain, is when there is scraping, swelling, twisting, and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixing of the senses, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes without cause, or without noise; and sometimes speech and voice are lost; and leaps from the wound a white moisture resembling pus, and also like burnt hair.
And if this sign shows you, if you stay with the treatment, take out the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it breaks or curves is that it is close to the left breast, and feels just as if it were fixed in something hard, do not fear; do not leave it empty. Sometimes the arrow moves like mice, and black blood flows without a wound, and comes cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting: then there is doubt that the patient will die
And if the sponge is split or the belly burst, and in leaping at any point of dung through the intestine root, if there is no hope of cure, do not attempt to extract the sponge.
If the arrow breaks under the skin in the armpit, if it is not taken out immediately; it causes great pain and swelling and breathing difficulty And all the limbs move together.
As for the other limb, if the face, the neck, the chest, the armpit, the groin, the shoulder, the elbow, the wrist, the hand, the foot, and the limb in general are affected by numerous disorders.
When the sponge is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I have already told you, because of what you have done otherwise.</start_of_turn>
And if the bladder is split open and the urine spurts out and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain. These wounds are mortal.</start_of_turn>
And in a game there was a sliver of wood that had penetrated the fat of the ear, below the cartilage, and the sliver was removed, and did not leave a mark except for the tip towards the heel, and the sliver was as large as a Turkish bow, and in all this time there was no damage to the ear; the game was healed, and there was no further complication And take out an arrow from the throat of a Christian; and the arrow was Arabic: I soothed the barbs, and cunningly pulled it out until it was freed; and the Christian was healed.
There is at home a wound where a hair or a tear is at the root of the nail: I grasped it, and pulled it out from the other side of the grease of the ear, and it healed without any harm.</start_of_turn
And I pulled out a hair from a game of hair that was in the grease of the oil from the marrow of the bone, and the hair was replaced, and did not reach anything except for the tip towards the ear, and the hair was as thick as a Turkish bowstring, all in all a very clear sense of hearing.</start_of_turn
The just man was sound, and there came to him no evil occurrences.
And there went out a stone from the throat to a Christian, and the stone was Arabic to the ear.
I saw the beards, and I suspected until I went out, and the Christians were sound.
And there went out a stone from my home, that was in the belly or stomach, and I thought that it would die;
and then after XXX days, if it did not change its position; I cut on the stone, and I grasped it, and I went out, and there came no evil occurrence.
And if I went home where there was a stone that had fallen out or was behind, and there was a deep wound there;
And immediately take hold of the arrowhead within it, and do not change its natural disposition, do not find any hindrance in any of its natural works.
And thus it is with another man, who had an arrow lodged in his face, and it was closed with a bandage. and immediately take hold of it suffering great pain;
and the like of other things.
And thus drew an arrow at the king's palace, which was stuck in the middle of the nose, and was a weakening declension towards the lower part; and the arrow was completely recovered
I was called to the care after it had been stuck for three days I kept it for the days, and healed the wound completely, and reassured the patient for a long time, until he said that the splinter was no longer in his heel; and he told me.</start_of_turn
I feel it at every moment, a slight tremor, and I do not feel it myself. and there is a tingling sensation and pain in the earlobe.
I thought it might be an arrowhead. I put on a plaster dressing with a digestive agent, because of which the swellings do not increase and the wound of the arrow appeared to me
and the wound of the arrow appeared to me I put on the plaster again, and I closed the wound properly, and I kept the patient calm for a long time, until the arrow was removed from his chest;
and he told me that it was gone I put on an aqueous corrosive medicine on the wound by hand for a long time, until it was over, and I held it, and I felt the head of the arrow that remained in the flesh
Then I saw in the opening of the wound by that doctor’s hand, as the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and passed through well the remainder of the three months, and then grew so wide that I was unable to close the wound, and I held it together with one hand and the other, and could not do anything about it.
where I had to continue to struggle and devise ways to manage things, until I set the pins firmly in place, as it is written at the end of this chapter, until I had finished, and restored the wound
And the physicians say that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured
Or have you spoken of the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on that which I do not say, for the books do not teach me everything;
But you know masters that I understand very well many great things, and that which is present and lacking, true nine works, and a new instrument, following the descending order of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of members or are cut off for that matter, for two ways. Or by force or by other means;
And that which comes out by itself is an arrow that has penetrated flesh, and that must not be repeated any more.
And if it does not come out now, leave it until the chariot is completely overturned, and rejoice at its coming out.
And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, if you leave it for a few days, and move it every day.
And then it will come out, and if it does not come out, if you force the chariot to turn completely over, until the wheels are splayed, and then take it out.
if the clot is placed back into the flesh if it cannot be seen, if one has tried everything.</start_of_turn and if you feel it, if the limb has no visible blemish;
and if you do not see the wound or the clot, and if there is no bone, nerve or vein, if the pain is great;.</start_of_turn
then pull out the clot if you see it, and if there is bone stuck in the flesh of two parts to the muscle that you pull, and then break or crush the clot’s ears until you can pull it out.</start_of_turn
And be subtle, though you do not break the splinter, that you draw it out more firmly.
Therefore take hold of it immediately, as long as the nails can grasp it, and then extract it: if it leaps out now.</start_of_turn> And if blood flows out from the wound, contrary to what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
Beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and keep the wound closed as much as you can without causing harm, or too tightly or loosely, or firmly or gently;
Put the patient in the position in which he was when the splinter slipped out, for that is the greatest aid, and if you do not know how, follow what your signs tell you
The splinter comes from another place, or you see no opening, or the skin is stretched out in that place if you see it or feel it
Tailes donc sur, tant que les tenailles puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai. Therefore take hold of the limb, as long as the nails can reach, and then extract it.
If the dressing is torn or stained with blood or pus, and it is close by, grasp it firmly; if you grasp it, keep hold of the wound and the nerves, then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot be moved, if you leave it in place, and then resume the extraction until it comes out again.
And if there is a splinter of bone, it has burst open; hold it firmly at all times
When there is a break and you see that an instrument has pierced, if you administer it with a twist, so that the tip of the splinter enters the hole of the instrument.
Then extract it, and if the splinter is caught, hold the instrument at the point where the tip entered to make the extraction easier
And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow
And if it is known that the splinter is in the heel, the foot, the belly, the bladder, or the breastbone, and it is close, cover over it immediately if you can.
cover the wound and the nerve, then extract it, and then close the wound if necessary. leave it until it is healed.
The form of the teeth is such that they can bite and scratch if it is thus:
There are many ways to do this. large or small, depending on the size of the splinter
There are veins that we must avoid in this place, which are 16 in number: two veins that are behind the ears, which are covered by fat; and two arteries that are in the two temples that appear; and two veins that are in the two armpits, which are covered by hair; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the base of the nose; and the two veins that are at the collar; and the two veins that are under the tongue.</start_of_turn
From veins where one has known themselves to be safe, there are either 16 or 17 of them, that is to say two veins which are behind the ears, which are opposite the bones of the earlobe And the two arteries which are in the two temples appear; And two veins which are in the two armpits of the two eyes, which are called “aspises”. And the vein that is under the forehead And the vein that is at the back of the neck And the two strings which are in the ear or collarbone. And the two veins which are under the cheeks of the mouth, and these are the veins which are called “augeherich”. And two veins which are beside the tongue.
The veins which are commonly known are five in each arm.
One is the cephalic [dislocation], and is on the left side of the breastbone, and they call it the people "the vein of the head. And the minor [dislocation] is called "fast," and is composed of the cephalic and brachial veins, and they call it the people "the vein of the arm And the brachial vein if it is on the left or right side of the breastbone, is called the people "the belly vein," and is above the rib cage, and is that from which we generally see blood leaking out openly on the pouch.
And the saving vein is the one which is between the elbow and the wrist, and if there are two rains.
And in the arm and the forearm there are three veins: One of them, if it is on the left side of the rib cage, and the other on the right side of the ankle. and the vein which is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other rib cage.
and on the other limb are three veins beside those.
The blood from the veins which are behind the ears helps to expel old blood and evacuate;
and the quality of the blood, as I told you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the hand or the veins are rough; then stretch the patient's neck with a pin, until two veins appear behind the ears in two loops dependent on the head: When the thumb is stiff at your disposal, and if you feel a tingling sensation at the base of your thumb, take hold of it.
Then take the lancet and pierce through the vein until you reach the bone, then keep your hand firmly against the upper part of the vein, grasp and tear the skin and the vein well together, and let the blood flow until you see it
Then strain and tie it, until it is healed
And I have already mentioned incision and cautery or the first book.
The blood of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth an ancient pilgrimage, so much so that it causes swelling, nausea, and vomiting, and at the root of the tears there are pus-filled boils.
And the same quality of health if it is like I have said. And that the patient is able to strain his neck, so that the two veins open widely. And he feels the pulse below his arm, and then he raises himself up;
Then keep the hand above your arm at your index finger, and hold the lancet below, and keep the vein above, and close the wound, as you have done with two other veins, and do as much to stop the bleeding as is necessary
Then loosen the patient, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then put on a bandage And then leave it alone, and let it be until it is healed;
And thus we have spoken of it above and of their treatment and of their extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The blood from the front vein is worth as much as that of the cephalic vein; it has diseases of the old face, and emigration, and redness.
When the patient strains his neck by turning, as the vein bursts open. Then take the instrument which is called the "forceps," which is like this:
And put the point on the vein, and hold with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out as much as you see fit; Then loosen the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is whole and never again with a wide flame.
Whatever, it is not permitted to make the flames too great. and the same from below, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
The blood of the two veins that are two palms wide if they aid the eyes, and the teeth, and the redness, and the yellow in the fat, and diseases of the face;
and the quality of their blood is that the patient strains their neck by twisting from side to side, as before
then the same, and let the blood run, a long distance of flame a wide distance, because there is no fat. And if the flame is subtle, by chance it breaks;
Then make the blood flow out steadily, as much as you are able, and then bind up, and bind firmly.
When the blood in the vein is too thick, it turns to water, and causes swelling, boils, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and even when it is old;
When the quality of the blood is that the patient bites his neck, then strain his arm at your left hand, and take a moderate flame long, and apply it to the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough, and it will not start to heal now
Do not go too quickly, and make the blood flow out steadily as you need, then bind up, because it is moist and will restore itself at night
And thus is the form of the flame: the saliva from the two armpits helps to expand the spleen, to initiate fermentation, and to expel disease, and to cause hiccups, and to corrode, and to cause herpes, and to cause tumors.
And the quality of the saliva is when the patient pulls out his tongue alternately from both sides, as we have said.
Or the master is standing over the patient's head, and the patient sits on one seat, then open the vein widely, and take blood steadily, or as much as is necessary.</start_of_turn>
Then repeat this on the other vein, then loosen the limb, and restrain loosely the main veins, so that the patient does not strangle.</start_of_turn And let him stay until morning, when the wound is healed.
And of the blood of the lower lip the tongue. The blood of the veins which are below the tongue helps after the blood of the cephalic vein, and this is at the widening of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases; and the quality of the blood is that if the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and you touch the tongue, and look below each rib towards the costal margin of a black vein: close both of them, and do not move them too much, for below are the arteries.
And make him sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I have said; Then turn the face up, and look at the two veins, one on the right cheek and the other on the left, and know them by their blackness, and by the fact that there are small black veins running through them
So take both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, if the greater one is at the back, and also do the two veins which are below and above, because this is the right way
The form of the blunt needle is well known, and is large as you see: The blood of the veins which are below the tongue helps after the cephalic blood, and it is at the widening of the throat, and has diseases of the eye, and has diseases of the mouth
And if the patient is a healthy person, if he sits between your hands before the sun, he stretches his tongue, and looks downwards at each cost he sees a black vein.
The healthy one thus stretches both hands and does not move them too much, for these are the arteries.
The veins that we commonly call healthy are healthy in two ways:
or if they are pricked with a sharp flame like a burning candle, or olive oil as thick as trenchant earth, and is called "anesil". and are large and subtle according to the size and width of the veins. The blood of the basal vein, which is one of these veins, helps to alleviate diseases such as hiccups, colds, hoarseness, pain in the side, and pain in the belly; and it is useful to know that it is linked to the artery which is opposite to it.
And there is master in opening the large veins filled with obvious thick blood, which contains great blood and trouble; And this is the form of the olive flame:
And if the pulse does not clearly show its passage, if you must extract it, and bind another; or you wish no more of it, or you leave in its place the vein filled with blood in the arm: it will show clearly; and grasp the flame as little as possible, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And this is the form of the olive flame: the blood of the basaltic tree, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments such as sore throat, or swelling in the throat, or pain in the side, or belly.
And it is necessary for the healer to know how to keep the blood steadily flowing, and that he beware of the artery which is close to it And if he severs the artery, and blood flows out, if he has held it firmly as I have said; Then he must not be afraid of the flame, but must cut as if it were a nail
And if the basaltic vein does not show itself clearly, if you must extract it, and bind another in its place Or you want no rain from it, or you hold in your hand the vein filled with blood: it immediately opens. and the bead to the flame is stifled, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if you see the blood vessel open, if you must hold the limb so that you can touch the place as long as you know the pulse.</start_of_turn then sign the limb is loosened, and then hold the limb, and hold the vein to the flame stifled.</start_of_turn and beware that you do not cut the artery when you see the limb swells, for it is the artery.</start_of_turn Wash away the bloodstain.
If you see it [blood] flowing out like the urine of a child, and it is pale and transparent, know that it is without an artery. Hurry up, and put your hand along its length, then stabilize your hand if it does not bleed; for this often happens Leave the limb still and do not move the patient;
Or be quiet and do not move until it is healed.
If it does not bleed, and it is painful, and the physician is not present, if the artery has burst, for the head of the shoulder will have been pulled back And he must hold it [the dislocated limb] still.
And take a bandage of linen, and bind it, and take hold of one of the halves and bind it well to the other side;
and he must hold it still, that is good; if not, as we have said, powder which sticks blood
and the sticking blood does not go away in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the hardness of the limb.
The blood of the vein in the middle helps so that it heals without the head below and the bones below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the healer to be wary of the nerve which is below, and if it is not grasped firmly, and if he pulls it, it swells and the patient is either crippled or by chance cannot recover.
And this nerve often bursts, and if it does not burst in some home due to its subtlety, it is necessary to know that you must remove it with an instrument that is anesthetic And hold the nerve firmly in your hand.
The quality of the blood is as you think
The blood of the cephalic vein helps, that it attracts without pain, and helps the eyes
And it is necessary to cauterize with the olive oil flame or the myrtle flame, because this is the safest of all veins, because it does not contain any nerves or arteries However, it is better to inquire more gently the first time, and do not grieve if it does not succeed the first time, and we begin again. and sometimes we must force the limb into its socket again, which we must not do the first time, but we do not grieve.</start_of_turn>
It is not permitted to give medicine to those who have passed sixty years.</start_of_turn>
The first thing you must know about health is that blood should only be drawn when absolutely necessary to preserve health and to ward off future diseases.</start_of_turn
or from the three veins that are in the wrist.</start_of_turn namely the cephalic, facial, and basilar veins.</start_of_turn and it must be done at the beginning of the meal with fasting and vomiting, and after eating when the sign of swelling appears.</start_of_turn
And if one must strengthen the first joint or the third, after two hours or three days.
The healing that is administered for ailments has no definite duration, but when it is necessary for a joint or nut, in all hours and at all times
and it must not be strengthened too much before twelve years, nor a woman who has borne for more than four months until the seventh month. And if the vein bursts the first time, that is good; but if it bursts again, it must be stopped once and for all, or it will not be healed.
And when anyone sees that he is healed in any way, if it be possible, if there is a slight hernia, if there is retained phlegm, so that the veins do not swell the intestines with nourishing humors to the principal members
neither does one know that it is too sore from meat, nor that it is dry, as much as there is reason to be, neither hydrophiles
And if he suffers from vomiting, pain in the belly, and excessive urination in women, and travail, wakefulness, and slumber, and all the virtues, or by the weapon or poison;
Then subtile the humors, if he is not already fat, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power to do so.
Then enter or bathe, if nothing hinders you, to subtilize the blood, and to keep the pulse in the wrist or the side, as we have said
and keep him busy with work, with anxiety, and with pleasures, and similar things.
Bind him and comfort him, and keep the patient higher than the heel which we support, and wipe his hands twice or thrice, then gently pull the limb downwards, because if it is too tense or swollen, he cannot correct it without
And then he wipes the limb with his hands, until the veins swell, and one feels them.
Then he moistens the limb with a little oil, and places his left hand on that vein below the limb a palm or where he wants to see it healed, so that the vein does not bleed and cause damage.</start_of_turn>
For there are veins that flee just like strings to the healer, and if there are such that are filled with swelling, so that when the flame is put on, when it is taken away, it cannot open the vein, and this is what is to be feared.</start_of_turn And if it causes the vein to burst, if the wound is too wide, because of this one must advise the healer in these matters.</start_of_turn>
And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; If not, if it starts again immediately, take hold of the limb once more or hold it firmly in place, for if it has not burst.
If the limb has burst, and the patient groans, if you leave it for one or two hours and do not bind the arm: surely there will be swelling.
do not enter or bathe, then restart the bleeding if it stops;
if the wound is small, or if it seems that there is not much blood, do not doubt but that there is enough bleeding at the root of the wound itself
And the work is often done hastily, even when the illness is severe. for it often happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the limb inflamed, if you do not renew the blood flow, put on a little oil, for it softens the flesh of the blood, and makes it limp in this limb the oil that is on it
and thus administer the oil in the wound to stop the bleeding of the veins; thus the blood flow is stopped
and this itself brings about a tingling and swelling of the eye, when it is put on the limb; if it is done carelessly and escapes when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, even if it does not burst except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are hasty, put on the wet sponge immediately and over it a little charcoal, and hold for an hour.
And hold that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days without any blackening or greening, if this does not trouble me. and if you see it, put nothing else on it of aloes or myrrh dissolved in vinegar, mustard, or the like.
And many times there comes an abscess and a discharge of blood from the basilisk.
Put your hand upon it, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, that is an ominous sign. Listen well that you do not place anything upon it of what we have said, for by chance in vain without an artery;
but it makes it swell dry to harden the limb, then treats it with another treatment, until it is healed
And to him who has a cold constitution, it is to be given soft bread soaked in the juice of green apples; if he is faint, give him blood three times or four. And if he is of a cold complexion, mix before the blood soft bread soaked in beeswax, or in aromatic beeswax with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant oil.
For if it is not black, if you leave it to fester as long as it is red; and if you see it large, if you leave it until it is subtle; and if it is too hairy, if you leave it cold
And it must be known to him who is plain and strong, and has the skill of extracting blood, that we make the wound larger and the flame wider;
And for the feeble-minded, do the opposite; make him safer thus, often and always, and must make him safer by cutting across, not by pricking.
This method of bleeding is useful for stopping excessive bleeding and relieving pain, and is worth more than bleeding that lasts a long time without widening.
And for the one who has a bruise, give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice; If he is pale, give him three or four spoonfuls of blood; if he is dark-complexioned, give him soft bread soaked in aromatic syrup of honey, or in aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup
And whoever has seen himself recover in another place, if he must recover on the second day or the third
For there is blood in the body which is already clotted, and causes fever; if it is prudent to extract a great quantity, and to dilate the opening as much as it screams in pain; then that you reward all the blood conditions, and put your hand on the pulse when it is well, that the blood does not reappear in place of the pain, and this often happens when the patient is negligent; and do not do so except when you see the limb slipping, and make the blood flow the second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly; if it is crooked, that you extend the limb immediately, because that would be bad; but leave it as it is when it is well the second time; or you point at the tip of the flame, until the one which is frozen at the opening of the vein is forced out, and put on some oil and press lightly.
And if the vein has fled, if you leave it and do not restrain it, as long as the incision is calm.
And if necessary is to drain blood a second time, if the same vein is still bleeding, or in another vessel, or in the other arm.
For there is much blood in the bruise that has already paled, and it causes fever. If you are forced to manage a great quantity, and to widen the opening so that it hurts in the belly; Then you must restore all conditions of the blood, and put your hand over the pulse when it is sound, so that the blood does not come out in place of the marrow, and this happens often when the patient is negligent;
and do not attempt to move the limb a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly upon it if it is crooked, extend the limb as much as possible, because that would be bad
but leave it until it is sound a second time; or you touch it with the tip of the flame, until the one that is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out, and put some oil on it and press lightly.
If the patient grasps his hand in hot water, while the flesh is red; then bind it moderately, so that the wound opens well; and pull the limb through, neither too wide nor too long; or cut a large opening and draw the skin well up to the joint of the hand, and if it does not suffice, grasp the hand once more in hot water and leave the blood to clot in the wound, until you have enough; and if it is in this state, do not return the hand to the hot water, for more is put into it than in this; and the blood from this vein is more valuable than all the veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The blood of the saliva of the right hand is valuable for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method: strain the hand and immerse it in hot water, until the vein is emptied if we see it; and if it is pulled through, and if you press on it throughout, if it does not swell; and do not press too hard, for the nerves are all exposed without flesh, and then grasp the hand once more in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not move it.
And when you have treated the blood as well as you can, if you put oil and lint on the wound, it will help to heal quickly, and make a soft dressing.</start_of_turn
And if the patient has a cold hand in warm water, as long as the pulse is red;
then it should be bound more loosely, so that the vein opens well, and then do the same without making it too wide or narrow.</start_of_turn>
and if it cannot be passed without damage, keep the hand in warm water, and leave the blood to flow freely until enough has drained out.</start_of_turn
if it is in this state, do not force the hand into the warm water, because more harm will be done in doing so.</start_of_turn
the blood of this vein is more useful than that of all the others, for there is neither artery nor nerve.</start_of_turn>
The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
The hand is strained, and held in hot water, until the vein is emptied; if it is seen and if the colour comes through, and if you press it through everything, if it does not ache
and does not swell too much, for the nerves are all exposed without flesh, and then reset the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not touch it.</start_of_turn>
When the patient has a cold fever, and his joints are swollen from the heat, and the veins are full of blood; and if the veins are in the ankle, or below the knee, from there comes drops of urine; the same as if there were a large wound there, or at the ankle, that the urine comes out in greater quantity.
And if you keep it healthy on the bone, if you keep it warm from the cold that comes from outside, and the health of the passage is as if you were cutting; and be careful not to burn it.</start_of_turn>
And if it cannot be put back, if you reset the bone in the water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn>
And the quality of its saliva is that the patient should be immersed in hot water, and wipe over the vein until it turns pale, and press below the joint of the bone.</start_of_turn And if the vein is at the ankle, and below the bone there comes out a rain of blood.
healthy blood, then there is either a large or small rain, or at the ankle, that the limb is pale.
And if you are healthy below the bone, if you watch over the nerves that are soaked, and the health passes through just as if you were catching it;
or the fire is extinguished.
And if the patient drinks or bathes, and the wound is strained at the ankle for two thumbs, for otherwise it will not open; and if it opens, do so in all ways you can, and through and through; and it is better that you close it, for the wound is already sore, and it is better to leave it alone with the hands.
and if the patient must be treated for the first time, if it starts again later at the same time, because the wound is salty;
do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same with the other limb equally
of air bubbles.</start_of_turn
and if the patient is suffering from pain or swelling, and if the limb is twisted twice at the ankle, because otherwise the vein will not open;
and if she opens wide, if he can in every way possible, and through and through. and she must be grasped firmly, for her bones are soft, and she is readily displaced by the hands alone.
and she must be grasped firmly, for her bones are soft, and she is readily displaced by the hands alone. But if you do not hold her tightly, if he can neither lift her nor bring her down, nor towards the little toe, nor protect her from the nails;
then do as much as you can to stop the bleeding, and then tie the bone and put on a bandage and hold it in place it is now healed.
Blisters are made of horn, or hair, or wool;
and a wound is made in two ways: or by burning and drawing out blood, or by cutting.
Or by burning and drawing out blood, or by cutting. And this wound which is made by cutting is in two ways: or it is with great heat, or by cutting.
and the wound which is made by cutting and by drawing out blood is done in twelve palms of pain, from which one is all over the head of the sufferer. and the other is at the collarbone and two on two ribs of the collarbone and the wound of the face is loosened from the chin and the wound of the two scapulae And the catgut on the crupies; And the sponges on the armpits; and the sponges cover both arms. And the sponges on the legs; And the sponges on the calves
And the washing does not remove blood, for there are many veins that are scattered throughout the body, and for this reason it does not matter if some blood remains, as we do when we draw blood from a vein; It must only be administered cold, without heat or pain, in no disease that comes from congestion, until all the pus is drained from the wound
And if necessary for certain diseases, or for custom, if the dressing is changed every hour at the beginning and at the end, and every time in between
For some, when they are blown by the wind, their head becomes weighty.
and for others, when they suffer swelling and redness on their face, head, neck, and ears, they have swollen eyes
and those who have a discharge of blood in their mouth, and their tongue is swollen, and they spit blood and for some, when they think, and see blood and vomit and sweat and similar things.
The wind blowing in the neck is in lieu of blood from the head and from the brains, and for this reason it is worth to extend the pressure of the thumb, to open the channel of the beard, and in all things, and to cause swelling; and it is to be known that if it is held too tightly, it can cause strangulation or swelling of the stomach or the chest.
When the moisture of the marrow helps with the pain of the head … that comes from the swelling, and it does not suffice to do anything before evacuating all the pus.
and this vomiting is useful for the blood of the head, and it does not suffice to do anything except for those who are pale of complexion in use, or who have a cold, for it causes them great discomfort;
And for this reason I advise you to use it only in cases where there are severe diseases that cause great cold or chief.
The windsings cause such diseases of the mouth as disease of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in lieu of the remedies of the two upper teeth.</start_of_turn>
The exhalation through the collar is in place of blood from the head and the bile, and for this reason it is worth more than gold, and for swelling of the spleen, and for rupture of the gall bladder, and for all, and for distension.
It is useful to avoid too much pressure, for if it is kept too firmly, it may cause excessive swelling of the belly or pain of the chest or pain of the side
The exhalation through the collar is like the cost of two ribs of the collar if it is like the pain of the head, and vomiting and diarrhea, and strangulation, and toothache, and it is in place of the blood of the bile
And you must command the patient to express his hand to put it forward, that he does not grasp the artery, and that there be no discharge of blood.
The smells of the wind sometimes cause illness of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. And it is in the power of the two lower limbs.
The dressings on the legs swell widely, for they draw blood from all over the body, causing old wounds of the groin, of the kidneys, and the bladder, and bring swelling of the flowers; and are in the place of the groin bones, and the calves, and all of them cause the body to swell after a long time, and bring vomiting in various positions.
The smells of the armpits are as much as the veins of the arms, because it draws blood from these large veins;
And command the patient not to fear too much of the scent, because the flesh is nourished by fat, and knows from experience nerves and arteries.
The wound on the buttocks sometimes causes hemorrhoids of the foundation, and various diseases of the same kind, and you must make sure that the wound is large and deep, that it has thoroughly drained; And by chance, if it was subtle, if it burst; and would cause great wounds.
The veins of the legs swell so much that they draw blood from all over the body, causing ancient pains of the groin, and of the belly, and of the bladder, and soften the flowers (menstrual blood).
and cause two spasms, and two swelling, and all of them make the body ache after a long time, and cause vomiting in various situations.
The method of applying the cautery is that you must first make an empty wound, and then immediately apply it, and hold it firmly, and move it equally, and do not stop until you see the flesh red and swollen, and open the blood vessel
Then be firm, and restore the skin, and take care in the arrangement of the limbs, for there are some who have a tight scar and clear pores. if it is necessary to make only one incision, and you can make large wounds, and a deep wound; and do so cautiously.
and if it is not large, if you can make two incisions: the first time to uncover the large blood vessel
and if it is not very thick, if you can make a third incision;
when our veins swell with blood, it suffices to make one incision only. when our veins burst with blood, if we repeat the process often;
And if it is not suspected, if he fiercely bites, and if he finishes when the knuckles are perceived to be tender, and it befits one who has thick skin and tough, and who has many pores, that you rub the nails of the applied poultices aperitif and dissolvent. If it is thus, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
or if it is ivy, with ivy oil, or leek oil, or chamomile, or something similar.
And he who has excessive sweating should rise from wine strong, or from seawater, or from decoction of ivy or chamomile, or from other similar things; and he must not cover himself with a bandage before the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and he must not sleep after the ventosation, and must rise when he is expected to rise and when he is risen.
And guard him who is feverish from eating too much and inflamed; if he must take cold things, as grapes and cucumbers and lettuce easily, and similar things; and eat barley bread, and broth, and moist meats.</start_of_turn>
And he who has a cold complexion, if he takes honey syrup, and fragrant wine medium, which is between strong and new, and eat little, and eat barley bread and small fish and herbs; and when he sweats, he must drink more than he eats; and it is not permissible for anyone to give him any wine before or after the sweating, in order to comfort the principal members; and be discreet with it, but he must not abstain from it.</start_of_turn
And whoever has thick superfluousness, that they rise from old wine, or aquavit, or decoction of elderberry or chamomile, or other things of that kind.
And it does not suffice to use a vacuum before the bath or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
And do not sleep after the suction, and must keep awake when it is necessary to suction and when it is suctions.
And beware those who are sickly are collicky, and if they are too strong and inflamed then it must take cold things, such as pomegranates and radishes and lettuce at ease, and similar things. And vinegar, mustard, and soft cheese, and moist meats.
And vinegar, mustard, and soft cheese, and moist meats. And those who have a cold complexion, take honey syrup, and moderate wine, which is between old and new, and eat barley, and vinegar, and mustard, and small oils and herbs
And so when he becomes restless, if he must drink more than eat;
then you must give him some sustenance at all times, neither meat nor fish before or after, for to comfort the main limbs. And do not force him, but only give what he wants to drink.
The winds that are put to wound are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and the kidney, and on the belly and the belly-button and the groin and the thigh, because these members do not suffer from wounds above their joints, and one must only force them to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do on the nipples when we do not find blood there
to stop the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put wounds on the belly and the buttocks to appease the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu.
and the bone causes pain, when there is an opening or a stone, if the bone by its attractive virtue attracts the opening, or deserts the stone from its place. and never are they administered together with fire, and sometimes with plain water there is too much pain, as in the case of pleurisy, and in such a manner we fill the bladder with hot water or with water alone where there are concomitant herbs that cover this.
In the chest where it is administered in the disease of pleuresin, at all times, there is neither swelling nor rupture, and it is only administered when it is clear of swelling, and is placed on the limb only slightly; and this is the form:
and there are two large and half palms of mustard, or cost the joint between the mileu and I little hole, as for pushing out an arrow, or it is of spider, soft before so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the limb
And there is in the middle of a mile a twig of thorn or iron, to put a bandage on, and there are great and small ones according to the ailments and the extent of those who take them.
for the swellings of the veins are different from the intestines, and fats from muscles.
and must put this bandage upon the limb:
holding the bandage of wax or linen, and placing it inside the bandage through the twig which is inside the bandage, so that it sticks either at the bottom of the bandage or that it does not burn the patient
and then place it upon the limb, and must put it either upon the wound that we have mentioned, so that when we see that it has gone away, if there is still pain, we will remove the bandage.
And take hold of the limb like before, and repeat it often, if you must.
And in the case of a pleural effusion caused by pain, there is no sinew or opening, and it is not administered except when it is pure pain, and is placed on the limb only when necessary.
This sentence is incomplete and cannot be translated without the following sentence which provides context.
They are not administered except in limbs or where it is not possible to apply compresses due to their small size, as with breasts and gums, and similar things. and in wounds without hair, if necessary or not, and other similar things.
and the quality of the user is that when you find blisters that are soft and smooth without any wound, if you prick them;
And put a nut in warm water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies. And then either cauterize the vein and the abscess, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandage.
When they are full and tender, and it is possible to put on a suction cup, put it on, for it is worth more later
If not, if you lift the limb easily, and then with water, moist well, and then squeeze it
and if it is too late after the application of the bandage, moisten the hair with cold water, and put on again until the bandage is taut
And if they are not multiplied, if you put broken glass or gravel, or similar things, until they are extended;
or you put out half of the marrow bones and leave them until they burn out, if they stop now.</start_of_turn>
and if you have more marrow, take other bones.</start_of_turn>
And if the bones do not stick, if you rub the limb with fresh blood, or you put in a needle until it goes in, and then put them back, as soon as they feel blood, if they burn out.</start_of_turn
When you see that they are bleeding, if you sprinkle over a little aloes and burnt silk, or ashes, they will stop now.</start_of_turn
It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue to this book should be the sum of words and the chapters or the learned men put their understanding into them, and remain steadfast on the truth, so that those who are proved to know and learn this noble art, and learn from others. I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, if it is urgent to save the patient’s life on one side or the other, if nothing else can be done, if there is weakness of the limbs, or if the patient is a feeble or old person; or if the tension is not very strong or too cold; and mix cold baths, that is to say cold showers, and oil and laurel bath, and do not drink wine, do not eat fatty foods, and do not eat too much meat which fills the veins with blood, until you are certain that there is no further risk of fracture or swelling of the limb. If the patient recovers before the next morning, let him take the first opportunity to regain his former governance as he used to have.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent.
Listen well, dear son, for what I am about to tell you is strange in our land, for I have never found it written in any old book, nor have I heard of it from anyone.
I know nothing of this, except by the ancient books or because I have studied it so thoroughly that I have learned it from experience and from my life experiences
and I have described it in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have made it clear what instruments are used, as I have done in the two chapters before.
For a part of nourishment, rest and more the fracture will mend.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs to anyone, if you must hasten the patient to recover, do not neglect any part of the body, even if nothing appears to be wrong; for weakness of the body, childhood, or old age may deceive you. or if the temperature is not very high or too cold.
and eat cold broth, such as cold baths, oatmeal and broth, and do not drink wine, do not eat any greasy foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain that the cautery has healed, neither of the expansion of the matter in the limb
unless the patient recovers somewhat from the first treatment that was used
And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways. For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And know that bones that are broken into pieces and decrepit cannot well rejoin or unite according to their nature because of the drying up of the limbs; neither can those that are too brittle, like bones of small children.
but there is no remedy, hold above the broken bone the great tension which appears and unite the limb together, as long as it endures as before.</start_of_turn> and do not move from its place, for this reason we must nourish it with large foods, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.
And sometimes there is a sign that indicates its fracture, and its own instrument in restoration, as it is remembered; and it is known that the breaking of the bone is when it is twisted, and opens widely by pushing, and some by pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it can have twisting, or fissure, or a small fracture. If it is impossible for me to move the limb, but you bring medicines that come after, then restrain it now cautiously.
If it is impossible for me to move the limb, but you bring medicines that come after, then restrain it now cautiously. And the wounds which break that go into the marrow, and are two parts of the joint, it is now necessary to put them right equally, even as abscesses which come afterwards; and if abscesses come afterwards, if you leave no mark, as long as the abscess is appeased; then put them right alongside the bone as you wish gently and safely, and the wounds which restored themselves are more gentle than those which remained there or had parts. Then strain, as it is necessary afterwards.
And at times there is its own remedy and its own instrument in its restoration, according to what is remembered to come in its place.</start_of_turn
and it is known that the breaking of the bone is by this that it is twisted, and opens well by force, and some by pressure of the hand.</start_of_turn
And when there is no swelling or touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no fracture.
but he may well have swelling, or tear, or a small fracture. And he feels well in the hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if the swelling is good and does not constrain him too much, do not press so much as they do who make it come by their work an abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
And the bones that are fractured that go inwards, and are two parts of the joint, it is necessary to put them back in place equally, even as if it were alive;
and if there are abscesses that come, if you leave them whole, as long as the abscess is calmed down.
then put it back in place at the shoulder as gently and cautiously as possible, and the bones that are restored are lighter than those that were fractured or broken
Then the constraint, if it is necessary afterwards.
And if there are broken bones, if they extend two parts, if it is the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or two strings, or one string and your hand;
and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the parts of the limb that are broken are unbent, if you remain with all your senses the adnexes to its place as much as possible, and keep that in your work does not cause the patient pain or injury
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel well at the hand if you think that it is not well:
If the wound heals well, and is not too tightly bound, do not press so much as those who make it come by their work at an abscess with swelling and contraction in the limb.
And when the limb is stiff, if the patient feels pain that does not move, neither day nor night, neither turning nor otherwise; Beware that the limb is well secured so that it does not cause him any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you can put it in order so that he feels no pain.
Beware that the limb is well secured so that it does not cause him any pain. For when he feels no pain, if it is not at a point, and you can put it in order so that he feels no pain. And keep it properly positioned, so that no torsion arises when you restore it.
The condition of the limb is as I have told you.
But it is necessary that the splint that one puts upon the fracture be greater and broader than the others; and be as long as it is necessary for the limb in breadth or length; then strain over the toes in the same way as before; and tie under a thread without fail, as before under the fracture; the more tightly it is bound, the less. And let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of linen; for if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their threads of linen cord, that is a great mistake, because the thread will not be equal if it is too subtle, and it will not hold properly.
For indeed there are small members, such as arms and thighs and the like: for indeed it is proper to cover them with soft and fine linen cloths. and those that are large, such as knees and legs:
for indeed it is proper to cover them with a broad and firm bandage, for the large bandages embrace the whole great limb and constrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no bulge
then keep the limb still for three rounds or four, as it is convenient for the limb, and constrain the hand one inch above the break, and then go below the break and constrain less, than the break itself will slip away a little
and soften the limb somewhat and somewhat, until you take a great part of the pain away, and then take hold of another limb and turn the dislocation back in its place
Then draw again at the lower part of the fracture, and strain moderately, not too strong nor too weak, as we said before.
Then put between the broken bones some bands of linen or bandages, so that they are all even, and then bind them up above with strong bands, and then put on your splints well made above, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, put on above something soothing the abscess, which softens the swelling, and leave it to soak for a while;
Then strain above your splints, and let them be half as wide as a broad thumb, or of a staff from which nails are made, or of hemp seeds, and let them be like this figure:
But it is necessary that the support that is put on the fracture be greater and wider than the others.
And be of equal length as it is necessary for the limb in its entirety or in its breadth; Then it is strained upon the supports just as you did at the first hour, and then you should tie it down with a thread immediately, as you did at the first hour on the fracture The tighter it is bound, the less.
And it must be that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen
For if the thread is thick, like those fools who make their nets of linen cord, that is a great mistake, because the bandage will not be even if it is too fine, and it will not hold properly except with a space between the supports less than two fingers wide.
For when the limb is great, it is not proper to put these stakes in place except after five days or seven, or more according to the severity of the afterburn; and when this is done, the method of ancient plasters is useful for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take some flour that is kept beside the mill, mix it with an abundance of eggs, and make this confection, not too thick nor too thin, and use it. This is the common method of plastering that restores fracture in many positions, and is equally useful for women and for small children, for it is neither too harsh nor too rough.
Another method of dressing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three barley grains, linseed, alum, saffron, and Arabic gum, and mix them with vinegar; mix mirra and aloes, with vinegar; mix alechil with vinegar; and grind them up, and mix them with eggs; if the patient’s complexion is hot, use this dressing, for it is made of good materials and will restore the fractured bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.
Another method of plastering that is useful for torsion: take mugwort and chamomile, each in quantity X; myrrh and aloes, each in quantity VIIII; acacia in quantity VI; mastic of Armenia in quantity X, and grind them well, and mix with water or eggs, and administer it. For when the limb is large, it is not permitted to put in stakes for more than five days or seven, or more according to the severity of the wound that is coming out.
and thus if the manner of the old bandages is to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
and take flour that is held at the walls of the mill, and mix it with much egg, and make this confection, not too fine nor too thick, and use it; and this is the common method of dressing that restores the fracture in various situations, and even for women and young children, for it is neither too tight nor too loose
Another method of dressing that restores the fracture and dislocation and torsion: Pren quatre abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X trois. Take four bear’s feet and rue and enula and asefetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, in the amount of ten three; mix with mirre and aloes, in the amount of five three. Mix together seven parts bear’s feet, rue, enula, asefetida, Arabic gum, and mugwort, and ten parts mirre and aloes. Grind it together, and mix with egg yolk; If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restore broken bones quickly, and is worth more than gold.
Another method of plaster which is worth more than gold: Pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З. Take nutmeg and aloes, in the quantity of ten grains; and marigold and balsam, in the quantity of eight grains. Cinnamon six grains. Gum Arabic ten grains, grind them well, and mix with water or eggs, and administer.
Another way to soothe joints and bones that are swollen from their swelling, and to relieve pain, is to use oil of bones and bruise them, and to use ointment made from bones and meal, and to apply pressure to the wound, and to break it. Take new linen, wring out the moisture and oil it, and put it on the wound
Take root of chamomile, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, meadowsweet, one part of rue; grind them up, mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with vinegar or water, and apply.</start_of_turn
Another way to soothe bones that have been broken: Take dry fig leaves and terrestrial marshmallow leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Take root of chamomile, and flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and fennel, and violets and chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest. Take root of chamomile, marigolds, violet flowers, barley flour, rue, one part of fennel seed;
Grind them, mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with wet coriander juice, or water, and use it as needed.
And it seems Galen deems that one must put something warm upon the broken limb to restore it, such as wax and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said. Take root of chamomile, flaxseed, marshmallow, balm, melilot, violet and chamomile flowers, all of which are equal parts Grind them, mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest
Then loosen a little later, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone of the limb moved; if not, loosen by hand for days. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, sense rest or inflammation, if you are hasty, loosen it, and stabilize the displacement immediately; and apply a light bandage, and a wet sponge of sea salt, and immerse in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is calmed; then leave the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry lint, moistened in water or oil of rose, and bind with a nut, until you are certain that the abscess has gone; and rest the inflammation of the limb, and make the pain cease, then recommence the gentle manipulation, and another displacement, and do not strain it so much as before; and be discreet until it is healed.
And if you see swelling, redness, pain and swelling around the bone, and that it is renewed, as you did the first time, you must provide support and lian, if necessary.
Other methods of treatment that are worth more than lesions and pain: Other methods of treatment that are worth more than lesions and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions, or henbane seeds, and vinegar, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a poultice of it and apply it liberally.
And then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, and that the bone of his limb is not broken; unless it is loosened by hand from the start. And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, rest or inflammation occurs, if you are hasty, loosen it and support the poultice immediately;
and take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of sea salt, and immerse in water, and elevate the limb, until the swelling ceases and the pain is appeased; Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soak in water or oil rose, and bind up with a bandage, until you are sure of the cautery's effect.
And rest the inflamed limb, and if there is bone pain, then reapply the bandage loosely, and a little more of ointment, and do not bind too tightly.</start_of_turn> And do it discreetly until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Many kinds of fractures are seen, and various figures, and the causes are manifold; for there are fractures caused by the percussion of a spear, and the collar bone fractured throughout to the syphus which is the socket of the bone, as in the case of a fracture by splinters; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a "haichure".
And if there is no improvement in the limb after the things we have said, if you do not see it recover after three days or four, or five or seven; never leave it twenty days, as we have seen, until the swelling has gone down, and approach the setting of the limb slowly.</start_of_turn>
Therefore greater restraint must be used than before, and it engulfs the flesh, as I have already said.
and if you see the limb dry out more than usual, the flesh swells up, it will not be able to come out. it will rise with a hot water bath every time you stretch it, and even if you do it every third hour, you will cut through the ligament
because in this work, the limb must be pulled out from the member, and it must be strongly supported to prevent what the fools do, who return the limb crookedly
it is bad, and if it is done carelessly, I see nothing else but to leave it loose and give up directly.
Many are the ways of fractures, and various figures, and the causes are diverse.
for there are fractures caused by percussion of a spear, and the collar of bone all the way to the socket which is the marrow of the bone, as in the case of a splinter or fracture. and for this reason this kind of fracture is called a «splinter».
Or when the spear pierces the bone from below in a forward direction, and is called this kind of fracture «absolute».
And there are wounds of these two kinds, great or small.
And this happens more to those who have soft bones or heads of children; and it happens in all these ways that small pieces are loosened from them like stars; and I will speak of it in detail later.
And thus, we know of all these breaks by the tearing above them, the questioning of tensions, and the corrupt matter which is above.
And if the wound is closed in the bone as subtly as a louse, and the crack is small, and for this reason it is called a «capillary» fracture
And if the wound is made by fire, or by injury of stone, or by thorn, or by any other similar thing, and causes the piece of bone under to enter, and the head of the limb is bent as when they are heated over a cauldron. if between the teeth of the bone is something.
And that which comes after has moist bones or soft flesh, like a child's head;
it comes to all these fractures that small pieces are detached from each other as stars and I will speak of it in its place.
And if you do not see an imminent accident, and you hope for health, if so, begin the treatment.
When the limb comes first to you, and it is in the armpit, if so, it is right to remove the bone from its fourteenth part from the muscle that you must touch.</start_of_turn>
And if it is in this state, if you are hasty to remove the bone from its seventh part from the bone that you must touch, then the tissue of the bone will be corrupted, and there will come the accident that we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
And if a break of the bone comes up to the scalp that covers the brain, if you do that, you must cut off the split part: and that is that you take the head of the patient and uncover the bone in all the ways you can, and on the figure of the wound more deeply than you can; and if blood comes out from uncovering the bone, or incisions, do what is useful, and that you fill the wound with moist cloths soaked in rose oil; and rest the wound until the incisions have subsided, and be sure of the evacuation of blood; then when the fracture has been set, it is done in two ways: one way if the nail of the fracture is narrow in front, and that is the form:
And then there is another fracture which is greater than the first.
And so, if you have various sized nails, some thin and some thick, and they are pointed or iron-tipped, and in lighter work, that you do not bleed the head.
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the cloth that covers the brain, then you must make the fractured part whole again
And it is that you take hold of the patient’s hand and uncover the bone in every way that you can, and on the figure of the wound more thoroughly than you can; and if blood comes from uncovering the bone, or from an abscess, if it helps, and that you fill the cavity with cloths soaked in rose oil. And rest the wound until the abscesses have subsided, and be sure of the evacuation of blood; Then begin to support the bone, and this is done in two ways:
The first way is if the tail of the fracture is narrow in front, and this is the form
The quality for piercing through a brittle bone is that you put one washer on the bone, and turn your thumbs until you feel that the bone is pierced; then put the washer back in another place a little later, and do everything around, and close the incisors of the space between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you have reached the bone in your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pliers, pincers; and keep that you do not touch the brain or the jaw.
The second way is if there are many pieces of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and iron-bound
And in lighter work, do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is tough and hard, if you must pierce through, then you must know that you must pierce through only as much as the bone will bear, and must leave on the edge a margin or a circle, that does not leave the point pass beyond the bone;
You must also have several of these, so that when the marrow comes out from the thickness of the bone, if you have sponges over all the test;
These are the three forms of sponges:
The one that qualifies to pierce through the brittle bone is that you put one sponge on the bone, and twist your two hands until you feel that the bone is pierced;
Then he puts his thumb back in another place a little after, and then he makes all the surrounding area taut, and then he cuts through the space of the bone which is between the holes, and he does this more subtly than you would think, and lightly, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like tenailles, clamps.
And keep your fingers away from the brain and the jaw.
And when you have grasped the bone, and treated, if you can, reset the fragment which has come loose from the bone to any other instrument resembling a chisel, but it must be more firm and subtle than the other chisel
And if it does not stay in any of the small bones, do not attempt to extract any fragments, if the bone is lightly held by any instruments. Then treat the wound with stitches and ointments as we have said.
Or another way of working if it is known that Galen speaks of this, which is more useful. and the limb is very strong, and that is his word If there is much scraping beforehand, and afterwards more subtly, and does not cease doing so until it is well done
And do not tear from one side, but from the two costs, so that if you tear from the bone;
then hold a small mallet above, so that you can easily break the bone without damaging the skin that is below;
if it is close to the bone, if you break it easily, because we must break it gently and without pain
If the tip of the jaw is discovered, take a drape of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in olive oil, and put it on the wound; then take another drape doubled in two or three, and wet it in wine and olive oil, and put it on the first drape; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not damage the jaw, then administer by mouth another line of medicine, and do not restrain it more than is necessary to hold the wound only; and leave it in place for one or two days, until the swelling subsides, then remove it, and administer medicines such as root of iris, and oatmeal, and incense powder, and an apothecary, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer adequate medicines with the taste of medicine. Keep the wound clean, do not leave it bloody, do not leave it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the wound it swells and causes great harm; for when anything biting is put on the jaw, if it is not done by mouth.
Take heed therefore, if no other misfortune befalls the patient, as we have said, if there be any doubt or suspicion.
As for other surgeons and breakers of bones, it is appropriate that you bring the cause according to its location;
It is a thing that has no parallel among those who have studied this art.
If the disease is discovered, then you must take a drape of lint, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. Then take another drape of lint doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first drape And do this more gently than you would, so as not to damage the disease, then administer further support below the limb, and do not hold it too tightly except as much as is necessary to hold the wound in place only
And leave it in place for a while or two, until the swelling of the wound has subsided, then remove it, and administer medicines such as licorice root, alum, powdered incense, and an astringent, and similar things
And from these things make powder, put it on the wound, and administer besides medicines of a lawful kind in accordance with the biting.
And keep that the wound is closed properly, that you do not leave it open, neither do you leave it unclosed, for when it is closed over the brain, if it is crooked and twisted, it brings great harm to the patient.
For when you put on the teeth of biting things, if they do not desist from below. If one of the two parts is broken, if it is prudent that you swallow your small toe or nail, and put equal healing into your index finger and the pouch by driving it out, until it returns to its natural position; and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if black bile does not go away except by the medicine that we have put on, that a part of virtue has remained, so it is appropriate that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue I drape, and put it on the teeth of biting. Then the treatment for these things must be such that when they are healthy.
So that at no time are the two parts of the bone broken, or one by one, because these are two bones.
And this is because cartilage does not break, unless forced by swelling or bending, and then it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if one of the two parts is broken, if you must bite your thumb or pierce the bone, and put the break back into its place at the index finger and the palm by force, until the bone returns to its natural position.</start_of_turn And do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.</start_of_turn>
And they say no restorer should mingle the tents in the burrow, and die each for himself.
And if the fracture is two parts, if you make another one, hasten to restore the first one if you wish.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then bind the head of the limb so that it does not attempt to pull the fragments of the fracture apart, if the fracture is in one part.</start_of_turn>
Or if you break another part, if the fracture is through and through.</start_of_turn And let the attempts be so strong that they fill the hole of the wound.</start_of_turn
And if it happens that pus comes with snow while you are working, if you put some butter or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some vinegar. I do not know that it is good, but it seems to me that they must be soft in composition like eggshell and fine powder.</start_of_turn Then leave the hair, until the bones are firm and the cartilages hardened.
And never do we or do not put goose feathers in place of hair, and if there is even a slight breeze that blows, and if the eye is held steady, blow on the patient among them; or make them cough as you see.
When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and there is no break of the bone, except for the teeth which are loosened, if you know it lightly.
And if the pus does not come, if you put in plaster of Paris, oatmeal powder, and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put on soft bandages, and do not bind too tightly;
and if the fracture is slight and is broken into small pieces, if the extractor has suitable instruments, then cover the wound, and close the wound with stitches, and suture with dressings and ointments suitable for this.
If he has no wound or swelling, if he cures from tension, and he puts on linen patches, as long as he is well.
If movement of the teeth comes about, or a fracture, if strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a broken mandible cerate on and place over it a pair of doubled drapes; and over the drapes place a large well-made sponge, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and bind it to the tooth that you wish, and command the patient to rest, and feed on soft food.
It is appropriate, if the fracture is on the lower part, that you bite your thumb against the patient’s mouth. If the fracture is on the left mandible, if you hold your right thumb of the right hand, and hold the fracture lightly, and do it with the other hand forward, and keep it even.
And if postoperative swelling comes, if we have said it often before.
And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture, if there is strain from a golden or silver or silken thread, then put on the fractured mandible a cerate and put on a double drape. And put on the drape a great star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it on the bone as you please, and command the patient to rest, and eat soft foods.</start_of_turn>
If you see that the limb is crooked, if you pull it out at the shoulder, and then reset it to its original position; put a poultice on it, with coarse powder of rye or oatmeal, after you have oiled the bone well with butter.</start_of_turn>
put on a layer of linen bandage, and if the poultice is too tight, and the patient's condition does not improve, leave it as it is until it is healed.</start_of_turn> many times it heals in three weeks.</start_of_turn
And when you have solidified all these fragments, and there is no more movement, if the wound is wide, put on some covering instruments to prevent pain, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
and if there is a break and wound together, support the fractured piece so that it becomes solid.</start_of_turn If the subtlety of the bone has established firm coventions on this one.
The forceful rupture has occurred several times previously in this area, near the shoulder, and if it is broken in two places, there are pieces, and it is more light to restore; or if there is a break with a wound.
And if the break is when there is a wound, you must have two assistants, so that one holds the limb that feels the forceful rupture; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break back in its place so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor swelling.</start_of_turn>
The force breaks several times before, over the shoulder, and breaks if it is in three manners:
Or it is broken and loosened in two pieces, and there are fragments, and it is easier to restore;
Or there is a break with injury.
And the work is when the break is in the direction of the wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the force of the break; and the other extends the limb towards the part
then put the break even at your shoulders, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
And if you must extend further, put a round ball of wax or lint on the patient's shoulder; make it large as needed. and hold the forceps, and strain the ball at your hand, so that you break it evenly, as it should be.</start_of_turn>
If the wound runs deep, if there is much blood, apply oil of roses, aloe, and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
Then direct the break to your side, and if you find debris, if it comes to that, you must make an incision above.</start_of_turn
and withdraw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be rejoined by any means, if the socket has reached one of your incisors.</start_of_turn but hold the forceps steady, for this is the instrument to prevent the blood from clotting.</start_of_turn
And it seems like a scoop, but is not so wide, and be as large as it ought to be, according to the size of the bone and the capacity of the work.
And has two holes, as you see, and one is large, and the other is small, as is the course of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
And when you are sure of the position of the cautery, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the position of the cautery, if you find the wound of cloth and stitches, according to their quantity
When the scapula is broken or widened, do not pull it out by force except by touch; if the limb appears according to the fracture pattern, and is reset according to its natural form, in all ways as you wish; then put on the limb powder with abundance of eggshell, and bandage lightly, and put on a double drape; then put on a broad and subtle staple, a little wider than the scapula, and when the staple is fixed firmly in no part of the scapula, if you use the staple of hemp, so that the staple rests evenly; and then strain it with a great firm bend, so that the staple does not move from its place, and watch the skin of each joint; and every time it swells, if you strain, and put the staple back in its place if it has come loose from its place, and lie the patient down on his side; and the scapula is restored in twenty days or less. And when this number is completed, if the bone is fractured, and so be careful, for this is not a bone that easily breaks.
The stiffness of the bone, when it is painful and tight, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the fine powder of mill and egg-white, and put on soft stamps below, and put a sponge of soap on the heel, if you have need of it. Then take a very great bend of a palm of a broad kind, then put on two layers over the toes, and place it. Then take a slender rod of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that palm, so that the head of the palm rests during; And put the rod on the heel, and turn the palm on the collarbone, and loosen the tight flesh, and loosen the painful flesh. And hold the shoulder firmly in place, and when you see that the limb holds the heel firmly, and you clearly see that the rod does not move from the heel bone, if you reward every joint, and when you see that the limb is straightened, if the restraint is maintained
And make the patient lie on his back, and put under his buttock a little cushion, to lift the shoulder up. If you align the break of the scapula with the alignment of the shoulder, or if you bind the arm to the collarbone, and do not loosen it until it is better, for up to twenty days.
Then reapply the bandage if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it in place until it is restored
and it is restored in about eight days, and less to no homes.
And if a piece of the bone thrust forward, and not a little like before, if it stays there, and the bone, do as we said at the fracture of the forceps to appease the afterburn.
There is only that the shoulder is broken or displaced from its place, and that you must not touch it except by treatment
If the limb appears according to the figure of the fracture, and is reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can.
Then take out the limb powder of wheat with abundance of eggs, and bind loosely, and put on a double bandage Then put on a broad and subtle splint, a space wider than the shoulder, and keep the splint firm in no part of the shoulder, if you use this support of towings of flax, so that the splint remains even
And then keep it tightly bound around a great bend firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the limb frequently
And every time it swells, if you tighten the bind, and keep the splint even if it comes out of place, rest the patient on his chest
And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
When this time has passed, if the dislocation has not already healed, and the limb is still stiff, for it is not a bone that has moved too lightly.
When it is broken in the middle, if it declines downward, and causes the patient great pain, and there is no relief, vomiting blood, and loosening teeth in the fractured bone, and all this together.
And if a piece of the bone thrust forward, and not a little like before, if it stays there, and the bone, do as we said at the fracture of the forceps to appease the afterburn. And the restoration is that the patient lies again on his back, and puts in between the scapulae, then presses the scapulae, and reassembles the two ribs at the hands, and discreetly put all in equal manner that the figure of the bone is as it should; then put on bandages and bandage below the staple of salt, or other soft matter, and cover with a bandage, and bind above the fractured bone, so that it does not move; and turn the patient around the back, and restrain him gently, and reward somewhat every hour that the limb is loose, and if it relaxes, restrain it; and if you see that it is loosening, due to corrosion or by inflammation that comes to the limb, or pain or swelling, do not hesitate, and loosen it, and scrape away the dressing, and address what has come from the manner of treatment; then remend the dressing, and restrain it until it is healed.
The limb is never broken in the middle, but this often happens but it breaks often at the end
The ribs that break from the breast only come from the back, at the shoulder and do not bend except because they are slimy; and the pain is well known at the inquiry of two.
When restoration is to be performed, if the patient lies down too often on his back, and puts his thumbs between the shoulders, then press the shoulders and assemble the two ribs with your hands, and slowly move them in all possible ways until the bone is set as it should be;
then put on dressings and support the delicate part of the salt, or another soft material, and cover it with a bandage, and bind it over the broken bone, so that it does not move And round about the neck he must twist, and hold it firm, and wait a while until the limb relaxes, and if it relaxes when held, do it again.
And if he is forced to loosen it, by corrosion or by swelling that comes from the limb, or pain or suppuration, if you are hasty and loosen it, scrape away the surrounding tissue, and rejoin what has come loose in a proper way.</start_of_turn>
Then rest the wound, and hold it firm until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Then put on the dressing and bind it with a bandage if necessary
The wounds that break the ribs do not come from their great extent after the back, and at the head downwards, but only because they are slippery.</start_of_turn And he feels quite well at the inquiry as two.</start_of_turn>
And if any of those who say it must administer food that swells the belly, to push out the pain at its departure. We do not do this, for after these chills have passed, life does not come again if it has not already begun.</start_of_turn>
And if the ribs break downwards, the patient experiences great pain, and points, as with tears, because the bone points at the gut. And there is vomiting and spitting out great amounts of blood, which is a grievous matter, and the old ones put in great effort.
And they say that no one has ever put a bandage on the body to stop the fever, for it is like reason; however, there is doubt that the bandage will not draw out the superfluous humours from the body by the disposition of weakness.
And they say that on must not cover the wound with coarse linen soaked in oil, but put on tents between the ribs to make equal the hour around, then either cure with the treatment for pleurisin, meat and medicine. If the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points towards the armpit, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is necessary to open the skin of the fractured bone, and if it is necessary to place a bandage, then one must cut through the bone, treat it gently, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with dressings until it is healed.
They say that no one has ever seen a wound heal without causing harm, because it is similar to reason although indeed there is doubt that the dressing does not extract the superfluous humors from the body by the arrangement of weakness.
of the fracture of the collar bone.</start_of_turn>
And if the patient experiences great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points at the gut, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is permitted to cut above the fractured rib, and if it is necessary to put in instruments to hold the gut steady.
And thus must one saw the bone gently, and treat lightly, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with sponges, until it is healed.
And if pus comes out, put on damp cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb;
cure while the limb remains swollen above the incision, or it must be removed, until it is healed.
And also at the spine of the back
And when it is reminded on the back and it is seen to be limp, it cannot be cured.
The wounds are mortal: if you do not work diligently in their cure
And if anything similar comes to the spine of the back, and you see that it is neither healthy nor sick, if you take care that the pieces are softened, and if the accident is that which is in the hands, and on the back there is wind and vomiting spontaneously;
And when it is applied to the belly, if the patient suddenly evacuates against his will. If this mishap does not occur, then the matter is less serious. If there is swelling, put on rose oil or yolk of egg on the spine; when it is calmed down, put on a comfortable and drying dressing, and bind it with a bandage, and tell the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where there is pain, until it is healed.</start_of_turn> It is deadly to him. if he does not toil in his cure.
Of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
And the cure is that if there is a hard swelling, put on the thorn oil rose or oil of nutmeg until it is appeased;
then put on a soothing and drying plaster and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover over the wound quickly.</start_of_turn> and the bone, then join the two layers of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, and then cure with ointment containing herbs, as long as it is necessary;
and if the bone is broken, which is called the «fracture of the marrow», if you hold your fist with your left hand and put it equal to the other hand at your side, and put the bandage and the support on, if necessary.
then support, and if there are displaced bones, keep them in place, and the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if the fracture is long or declines downwards, make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.</start_of_turn
There is only one case in which the thigh bone is broken, and if it happens, there must be some sign of injury at the head of the bone. And keep it long, and decline at the root, and comes to the patient pain in the limb, point and swelling, which breaks it.
And if you extend your hand over it, as long as you are over the wound; And the hair which is the wound and the figure of the limb;
And if the wound is at the head only, if you make it even, as long as it is in a natural position.
And if the abscess bursts, do not touch it, until the abscess has subsided; then put on what we have mentioned before; and then return to rest, and hold it still if it is appropriate, without causing any further harm; this is the proper method.</start_of_turn> And when you have put it even, put over the limb a cushion of wool or fur, and hold the wound, so that it does not move
And keep the limb still against the ribs, as long as the wound is even From the dislocation of the shoulder
And if the boil breaks open, do not touch it until the boil has calmed down, and put on what we said before. Then return to the restoration and tighten it if it is necessary, without causing any further harm.
And the other method is that one should order the attendants to hold the limb firmly at its collar and to grasp the limb above the elbow with the fist of the hand that is not supporting it, and to hold down the forearm with the other hand, and to extend the forearm to its greatest extent.
The shoulder joint is supported by the tissue between the shoulder blade and the head of the humerus, and if it is fractured, it must be restored in one of two ways:
one of which is to take one fist full of myrrh, according to this fashion
and bind the two fingers together, and hold the limb high, and support the patient on his seat;
Then the shoulder joint hangs limply down to the elbow, as far as the elbow joint, and has in it a swelling of the elbow; then it rests upon no heavy object or the attendant extends the forearm.
Then he puts his hands together, and makes the swelling even; so that the swelling returns as it should.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound does not come out, do not strain for more than thirteen days; put on a soft bandage and oil of rose, until the wound is calmed; then strain, and put the support on the bone, then assemble the limb on the aid, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the bandage, strain on the aid, and on the limb, so that the limb is in its place, without anything hindering it, or without displacing the bone.
And if you doubt that the bone is not displaced, if you use pins, put on the bone a pin wider and stronger than the others, and leave between the pins a space equal to twice the thickness of the bone; then strain on the pins, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely.
And if the swelling is close to the head of the shoulder, if you must put a little pressure from the elbow towards the shoulder, and another from the shoulder towards the elbow, from the swelling.</start_of_turn
And thus if the swelling is towards the shoulder, if you must put a little pressure lightly, gently, so that the swelling is even on the limb and on the shoulder.</start_of_turn
Then put them even, if it is possible, and hold them, because if they do not come out.
And if they do come out, if it does not come out by itself, hold them for seven days, and put on soft linen and rose oil, until the abscess is calmed;
Then hold them, and put the dressing on the break, and reassemble the limb on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the side
Then put the bandage, and hold the shoulder on the dislocation, and on the limb, so that the limb is stable, without anything hindering it, or without moving the bone.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use sticks; place a thicker and stronger stick above the break and leave between the sticks one space equal to the thickness of three sticks; and let one stick be as thick as to pass through the break three times from the stick side.
Then strain upon the sticks, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter concerning the break above the break, stronger and less flexible.</start_of_turn>
And if you see the settling of the sticks and the tightening, as we have said, while restoring the limb after the break, and if you doubt the fracture, let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Then look for three days in a row that the limb is neither swollen nor painful, or that the discolorations do not come to the limb because it is too stiff.</start_of_turn And if the dislocation is painful and bloody, if it remains for more than a day or two months.
And if no such accidents occur, if only after three days or more, let the patient lie down on his back, and rest his hands on his stomach.
Put the shoulder in its natural position immediately, while it is still firm and straight, and watch for an hour or so to see if the limb remains properly aligned, or if the ligaments are softened
if necessary, with the help of medicine, and do the thing which is before us, partly as if it were at the first moment And when it begins to recover, even if it is slightly
It is customary that the shoulder and limb should be taken hold of for forty days in all cases And therefore you must immediately loosen [the dislocation] and administer baths and ointments to the affected limb.
When the small bones are fractured, restoration is easy, and healing; but when the large bone is fractured, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when it is fractured whole.</start_of_turn>
If only the small bone is fractured, if it is recommended to extend the limb slightly, and put it equal.</start_of_turn>
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the «humerus» and the «ulna», of which one is small and is connected to the pouch.
The other is large, and is connected to the shoulder blade below the little toe;
By chance the large bone simply breaks, or the small one, or both together
When the small bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing;
When the large bone is broken, if it is fractured alone, the healing is worse than when it is fractured together with the small bone.
If in the fracture it is broken into pieces, if you put something into its place, and if there is none that pricks it now, and you do not manage to restore it to its place, if you leave it and the bone, as we have said before.
And if it is the great bone, if the coving must be more forceful.
and the handle is placed over the cusp, and grasp the pouch of the hand above the others, and the little finger must go lower than the others, and let the patient cross over on himself, and the cusp will be in front of him above, so that the patient does not feel any pain.
then extend the limb from the armpit to the outside of the hand, or to the elbow, and another assistant at the other side below
And if in the beginning of the restoration blood spurts out, if it is thick I cover it with a coating of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin; and I cover it from above secretly, until the spurting blood has ceased.
And then I apply the cerote, and I place a stuffing of fine powder with eggshells, because I put in the pins, and let the pin of the bone be more firm and wider than the others; and I make the wound have six pins or more in various positions: either that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and I stretch it more on the fracture than elsewhere, and I keep it together less often, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the draping that is on the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough; and let the thread, which is used to tie it, be neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
and if with the forceps for wounds, as I have already spoken to the singular chapter. take the cure.
and if during the commencement of restoration blood comes out from the incisions, if the drape is glued with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too thick nor too soft; And thus I recommend that you suspend the incisions for a while, until the pain from the aftershocks has subsided.
Then I order the bones to be closed, and I put the dressing of powdered meal with much egg, because I put the needles in place, and let the needle of the trocar be more firm and a little wider than the others.
and the stitches that must be taken must be six needles or more in various positions: or that the trocar is in one of the bones or in two;
And is more strained above the armpit than elsewhere, and all the days less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the hair be soft that is above the armpit, moist and not hard or rough.
And let the hair be soft that is above the armpit, moist and not hard or rough. And let the thread that is strained be of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said before
And if the swelling does not depart from the limb, because it is too great, then shalt thou soften it, namely by fomentation, and let it remain for some days, until the swelling depart, and then restrain it.</start_of_turn> And if other ailments come to the limb, if there is itching that comes to the limb, you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching is appeased
And let the limb be neither too tight nor too loose
or when the swelling has gone down, then let the patient hold his hands to his collar, and keep his collar even, and protect him from movement and contamination, and sleep on his back; and give him nourishment every thirty days or every fifty, or sometimes every twenty days, according to the composition and temperament of the virtues
Of the breaking of the hand
The bones at the back of the hand and two together cause many fractures, and only rain comes more often.
or else if it is twisted, then put the hands to the collar and let the collar be even, and be careful of movement and vomiting, and sleep on the back
And the wounds that this fracture has caused are restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and sometimes in XX days, according to the composition and complexion of the virtues.
And if the fracture is at the shoulder blade under the belly of the limb, if you make a ball of cloth, and command the patient to hold his broken limb against his side; then strain from a long cloth, and be the splint as great as the limb, and strain it, as it is commanded.
And if the break is downwards, if you command me to place a splint above and another below, so that the hand is overspread and straight, then I will bind it tightly around the hand, and hold it between the two.
And when the bone of the arm is broken or dislocated, if it is necessary, let the patient sit steadily, and look straight ahead equally.
Then put the hand on the extended cloth, and extend the minister the fractured bones, and put them equal to the eyes, until they are well joined
And put on the plaster and the bandages, if they do not come away, then put a splint as required; And be covered with a linen bandage.
And if the fracture is at the edge near the belly of the bone, if you make a loop of gauze, and command the patient to pull it at his fractured bone Then the stretching of a long hair, and if the staple of marrow is as great as the leaf of the hand, and the stretching, if it can.
The bones of the hip are often fractured, and one can see it when it turns frontward and backward; and the restoration is when it is bound together again.
And if it breaks out to neither of us two, if it is the marrow pouch, if you put it even, if it can. And the stretching with the leaf, and if you see that you put a right little staple to raise the break, and it does not move.
And if the break is like the others two, as in the index or the other, if you put it even, and tie it with the two healthy things that are after; Or you hold them together with holding, that the muscle is worth it, or you put on a staple, as if it were a pouch
And take care in restoring and arranging the cautery after it is finished, and cure whatever comes of it as I have said.
The shoulder blade is often fractured, and one can see it when it turns forward and backward.
And the restoration must be firm, so that it does not break again in the future. The patient lies on his face, then stretches out his limbs equally wide
It is when the fracture is in the bone itself
It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with a strong bandage doubled over twice or three times, and to remove the excess, then bend the limb until the talons reach the root of the nail, and pass a thread long between the thigh and the limb below the knee, from below the knee up to the top; then bend the limb and the thigh together, and put on the outer dressing and a stay.  Then put two threads of the same kind between the thigh and the limb as you passed before, and three stays that are below, and put back the thread at the top until you see below the piece; and the strain, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any further damage.</start_of_turn>
And if it is close to the elbow, then either the forearm is fractured or the arm is extended backwards
then put the bones in their natural position, and then put on the bandage and bind it securely so that it does not move
And if there is a wound above, if you leave it calm and then return to your work and your cure. The bandage is done in a partial manner.
It is fitting that you wrap around the bruise with a bandage doubled in two or three, and hold the excess, then stretch the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the hip and the limb, without loosening the knee, and keep the head of the thread below;
Then tighten the bandage on the limb and on the hip, and put on the external bandage, and put a pin on the bone of the limb
Then employ between the limb and the hip a cloth of soft cloth to make it even, and start to tie three or four knots above the wound And the more you go beyond the limit, and the less you restrain;
Then as two hairs of a thread that you have placed between the leg and the hip, and there are three stars that are below, then raise the hand to the head of the thread, as long as you see beneath the bone.
and the restraint, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any incision or swelling or anything similar. And if there is any loosening, if it comes loose, address that which comes, as we have said many times before.
and if there are pieces of bone that prick, if you cover them, it is useless; If it cannot stay in place, if it is necessary, cut the limb and draw out the bone. and treat it as we have said, so that it may be healed
And never is the limb broken in this way when we put in place the bones, as in the shoulder and the arm
although in the restoration made here I do not harm the patient.
If they break, if not only a tear, or an opening, and there is pain, swelling, and this feels very well.
And thus, if you put everything that is round back to its place, as long as it is put together firmly, then put the dressing on and place a round cushion there if you have need of it, and hold it firmly, then restore all the other things that we have mentioned before, such as an abscess incision and other similar things; if you put each accident in its place that it deserves, as long as it is sane.
Hairs that on the leg have two bones, of which one is called the "muscle" and the other is called the "fleshy part"; and they often break as it happens with the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all done in this way. And if both bones are fractured together, the leg is twisted in every part
and the restoration is made when the round parts are put back in their place, as long as the bones are properly aligned
then place the bandage and put a round pin in, if you need it, and hold it as it should be held, then reward all the instructions we have said before, as in cautery and the like If one meets with an accident of this kind that is still sane.
And if the great bone is fractured, one feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it is twisted from its place.
If one meets with an accident of this kind that is still sane, such as when there are two bones in the limb, of which one is called the “muscle” and the other is called the “foscile”.
and there is a fracture in its entirety as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is as if it were the same limb, and the work is all the same. And if both bones are fractured together, the limb is deformed from all sides
Once you have completed your work, if you take two strips of coarse cloth that reach from under the armpit to under the knee of the limb, and bind the limb from one end to the other; then cover with two layers of bandage from under and over, and bind firmly in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not be able to move forward or backward; and that is good; and no one should administer anything that will lengthen the limb, and if there is swelling, and it is a fracture, and there are many pieces, that the extension should be less violent and lighter; and adjust accordingly.
And if the large bone is fractured, one feels great pain, and it is well seen and is twisted about
Therefore bring extension, and set it even, and bind the edges even
But all the same, if the fracture is serious, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less severe and lighter. and the limb should be positioned according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, if you take two strips of cloth that are wide enough to cover the limb from the armpit to the knee, and be as long as the limb from the armpit to the knee,
then wrap around two layers of bandage under and over, and bind firmly in the middle, so that the limb does not deviate to the right or left, and that is good
and that there is no administration of oil that is long on the limb, and if there is swelling, and if it is fractured, it is put on the limb to prevent movement, and is done in the fracture or in the wound
And move each limb for the leg, to see if there is any other wound or accident. if the wound is so severe that it is still bleeding soundly.</start_of_turn>
And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is still swollen, because you will find the bones whole, whether fractured or not.
If there are two breaks, if you restore them as we have said must be done with the hand; then put at the break a support according to the length of the break, and make it somewhat wider; and put on the thumb that which I have mentioned, and strain immediately; and if there are three or more breaks, break them, and put on over each break a support according to its quantity, enveloped in one layer of linen, and strain the thumb from the bone. Make sure that the thumb remains above the break of the bone as much as possible, if it remains well-held.
And if there is a fracture of bones that are seen to be broken against each other, if you see these bones pressing on each other as if wanting to leave, put the limb on the earth like if it were going away, just as if it were an arrow that had gone astray; then put your limb back in its place, where the bones were raised, and press until they return to their sockets.</start_of_turn
then put the bandage and stamp on, and put cloths under the limb a little higher than two fingers wide, then tighten the limb steadily, and when you have finished wrapping the bandage and other things that you deem necessary.</start_of_turn
of the fracture of the clavicle bone</start_of_turn>
And if there are two broken bones, if you restore them as we have said, as we have mentioned before. then put at the end of the bone a support according to the length of the bone, and make a space wider, and put the dressing on that wound as I have said, and hold it firmly in place.</start_of_turn>
and if there are two or three or more bones broken, if you put under each bone a support according to its quantity, covered with one layer of linen, and hold the wound firmly from the bone.</start_of_turn> and let be above the head of the wound hold the belly of the bone well.</start_of_turn
And remember that you must not neglect the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned before.</start_of_turn And one must seek help for every accident as if it is urgent.
For the fracture signifies in many ways the right way of restoration: whether it be in this case or not
When the bones of nature are broken, if you make her sit wide, then incline her towards the lower back, and hold her rear;
then fill the belly of the patient with cotton, and put as much in as I stand;
then loosen the woman, and keep her back and belly still, and then pull out the cotton, until it comes out to the entrance of the nature, and bring the bones back with the palm of your hand
and when she sees blood, if the bone is grasped by the cotton, and when she has urinated, she will recover, and thus make seven days or more if she is restored, if you see it, take a bladder of Berber, and bind it to the belly with a bandage, and hold the bladder in the nature; Then blow in the cannula until the bladder is expelled from within. the natural consequence will be the bursting open;
then fill it with cotton, and leave it to soak for a while, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm or the woman breaks, if you restore it as we have said in the hip bone;
and they are not seen by those who put their study and their care into it, and understand my book
For the breaking signifies in many ways the right way of restoration understand then.
In the groin, when it is broken, take a gooseberry and press it against the groin; Then cover the wound with a cloth, and leave it for three days or until it is healed; and it will be perfectly healed.
And if there comes swelling, if you must leave the restoration until next day, as long as the swelling is appeased, and do not touch neither the third nor the fourth part, for you will bring about other evils.
And if the bone is fractured is appears above like a wound discovered, then you must know that you must touch it lightly with your hands, slightly extended.
And if the extension does not appear to you to set your hands equal, if the limb has this instrument which is of iron, which is two or three inches long, and its breadth is according to the quantity of the wound; for this reason it is necessary at the middle that it grasps three or four lines, according to what is necessary in the bruise; and be round and somewhat large, so that it does not swell to the compression on the limb at your work, and be above and forward, and large from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is considered that the curved limb should be placed over the head of the visible bone; and once it is put in place, as soon as it comes back, it should be equal on both sides
And if the fracture is slight, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, if you must cover the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it.
And if swelling does not appear to you to set your hands equal, if the thumb has this instrument of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the amount of the wound. and therefore it is necessary at the root that it grasps three or four, as much as is necessary for the wound cure
and be round and somewhat large, so that it does not swell too much at the compression on your limb during your work, and be ahead and large from the middle forward, thus:
It is called "palainche," because it must be placed on the visible head of the bone And the thumb once, when it returns, let it be even with the other. If you do so that it is in its place, then immediately apply a black astringent poultice; and keep it in place; do not put any cerote or other thing on the wound, for it will cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars [medication] when the bone has been reset, and leave the wound uncovered, and keep the dressing tight around the wound, according to the extent of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; for many times this has been done foolishly, and it has caused the patient to die or become lame or caused decay on many occasions; or the inflammation is milder and less painful than the other fractures.
And if you cannot restore the bone, as we have said, if you are forced to use a covering instrument, such as an tweezers or scissors, at your peril.
Then withdraw that which is remaining in the bone, with rough rasping and minor splinters.
And when you see afterwards one or two days that the swelling has receded from the wound, if you put on anything on the whole time, and there is healing of wounds, as with tetracycline and similar medicines.</start_of_turn>
If you do this too much, then moisten it with black vinegar, and keep it covered; and if it is in this state do not put anything on the wound, such as lint or anything else, or oil, for it will cause putrefaction and corruption
Then administer staples when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the dressing thoroughly, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with the breaking
And many times have I seen this happen to fools, and have brought about death or injury to the patient countless times. Or be more flexible and softer than other breaks.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that evil chances will come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to place it under stars.</start_of_turn but cover it around with a firm bandage, and bind it.</start_of_turn>
And if the limb persists in displacement, and cannot be soldered but returns almost to its place, with small pieces of bone, for it is necessary that you reduce the wound with all your might, and that you extract all these broken pieces which cause this pain.</start_of_turn
And if a fistula comes to the limb, or any other kind of corruption, if you can cure it, according to what is said in this chapter above.</start_of_turn>
And when the bone is broken, and is open on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for many times death comes from this; but leave it as long as it bleeds; by chance it will mend by itself after twenty days or thirty, and then cure the wound if you wish; if you do not wish, leave it.</start_of_turn>
The hairs which come out of the beard.
The hairs which come out of the beard often follow the breaking of the wind, even when it is close to the joint; and it is a helpful thing to see the figure of the limb; for by chance one cannot make the limb do its natural work.</start_of_turn>
And when a bone is broken, and opened on the limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and others of the great limbs, if you do not treat it, for many die, but leave it as long as it swells.</start_of_turn
By chance, if he survives for twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound; if you wish.
and if you do not wish, leave it alone.</start_of_turn>
We often come after the sanctity of the breeze, even when it is close to the joint, and the thing to be seen is the figure of the limb.</start_of_turn and by chance we cannot make the limb do its natural work.</start_of_turn
Therefore take care that it is fresh.</start_of_turn if you give astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and saffron, acacia, and similar things, that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a strong wine or with a lot of egg or with vinegar.</start_of_turn And place it upon the knot in the armpit, and hold it firmly, and do not release it from your hands until it has healed.
And place it upon the knot in the armpit, and hold it firmly, and do not release it from your hands until it has healed. Then dislocate it again, and repeat this process until the swelling subsides
Or you strain on a piece of soft tissue that is well done; For the property of soft tissue is that when it becomes stiff, it eliminates all the swellings under the limbs
When the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, and the swelling appears, it is necessary to pierce through, if the swelling above has subsided, and to make the excess visible. Or do not touch it with any instrument, until it has become stiff, and cure it when it has healed.
The limb is bent after the disease.
When the fracture has been restored, and remains firm after the limb has been weakened and straightened, if there is any cause for concern: or that it was too tightly bound and was not loosened as it should have been. or that there were too many bands and could not move freely on the limb or from excessive bruising. or from too great movements that did not suit it in its place. or from the presence of blood in the bone, if the limb is weak
The treatment is to make the patient rest and keep the limb firm until the pain subsides And he administered a bath, and he did rejoice and delight.
Then he put poultices on the limb, so that the poultices attract at the great nourishment, and swell often with hot water, until the nourishment comes to the limb. and returned to its natural shape
Or do not cause movement to the limb immediately after its fracture When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the bones are fractured open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural work:
if one does not believe the fools who say that the limb must be broken anew, and many have had this experience in our land
these works are blamed, and there comes great harm, and by chance the patient dies
Throughout, if swelling and torture are fresh, if it is known that they have arisen from hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, like fennel leaves, and radish, and honey, and similar things;
and you make a soft poultice, like that of aquaint done well, and you take the nourishment of fennel, and confit with butter of marrow or oil of sesame, and make a poultice on it.
or you take fat figs, and grind them with horse dung, and similar medicines that soothe the swelling.
And thus begins the book of dislocations. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury
And if the swelling is tough and hardened, like stone, and the bone is needed, if it is known to cover up to the bone, do the incision subtly; And put cushions and study in the treatment.
And I have commanded the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder joint from the head to the wrist.</start_of_turn>
Des mandibules.
For if we delay, if the limb swells up, and by chance when we reset it, we cause pain in the limb.
Therefore it is not possible to move it while it is swollen causing much pain and other aches
although when this happens, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him, as long as the pain subsides;
then raise the limb gently and lightly, and cure each limb as it comes into its place
When the dislocation is small, it often returns by itself in various positions.
For indeed, when the mandible is loosened and dislocation is imminent in both, there are two methods: Or they are a sign of bone looseness of their limbs, and soften them a little. Or they are completely loosened, and hang towards the lips, and cause him to salivate from the mouth that he cannot hold it, cannot close his mouth, and engulfs his tongue with speech.
And if it returns grasped, even if both mandibles are together, if they arise with hot oil, as long as they remain lightly; do not attempt to force it back, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if it is entire and accompanied, if you must rejoin it immediately, do not delay me;
and in such a way that the minister grasps the head of the patient and keeps his eye on his pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts and the other two hands be bent down, to make them equal
And command the patient to soften his jaw, his teeth, and move them from every side. And if the two mandibles do not manage to be reset at a single hour, and are not made firm at their roots, if in comes fever and swelling accustomed, and by chance vomiting of pure bile.
And if it is gripped, even if both jaws are together, if they arise with acute heat and oil, until they remain lightly;
do not tear me away, as we have said
And when they are gently returned, and the patient’s mouth is properly closed with soft lips, put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with linen threads.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his arms rest between two cushions, so that they do not move forward or backward, do not attempt to touch anything, but take light nourishment, until the pain is relieved, and the jaws are properly aligned
Then he must swallow what he wants lightly, and do not work to open his mouth wide while eating and drinking, until his jaw is well oiled and healthy.
The forceps cannot pull out a wound that is deeply seated, and is always damaged when it is driven out, and it is always felt.</start_of_turn
When you see this, know that it is a loss; And often it causes death to him who has it, in seven days.
Hairs that are too long at the shoulder are not loosened by anything except in three ways: Firstly, that they are loosened at the armpit downwards; and secondly, at the part of the wrist; and by chance at the part above, and this is enough; do not loosen them from behind the shoulder, or from the front, or more than once; and if several times they are loosened downwards towards the armpit, even among those who have little hair, for at these jumps they become immediately ill; and among those who have enough hair, the jumps become painful, and return to pain.
And the restoration is when the patient lies still with his back on the ground, and extends his arms; and then press the limb that is towards your palm, and it will return
then put on the bandage and the splint, and bind it tightly
and the one who is on the outside cannot unbuckle it. If not, and if it dislocates once more, if you leave it in its place as we have said.
Then place the support and the bandage, and bind it, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest until he is well;
And in this way the head of the shoulder is brought back to its place when it has been dislocated from its bone
Therefore it is necessary that you suspend it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.</start_of_turn>
When the shoulder blade is not dislocated except for three ways:
One is that it dislocates at the armpit downwards; And the second is at the painful side. And often it is loosened at the upper part, and this is what usually comes about.
And do not loosen behind for the scapula, and do not loosen from the bones;
And often it is loosened from the scapula downwards, even with those who have much hair, because of these jumps there is great suffering
with those who have enough hair, the jump is painful, and returns painful.
And the method is that the physician grasps the painful limb upwards, then puts the thumbs downwards on the buttocks, and grasps the joint firmly upwards to the bone; and the physician grasps the limb and extends it upwards, since it is put downwards.</start_of_turn
You must therefore believe it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation is when it is tilted towards the buttocks, and distinguishes between the painful scapula and the sound one, and you will find between their diversity the manifestation And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow space, and loosen the shoulder blade from the bone of the shoulder, as if it were a bone. And you cannot make the patient move their arm to its place, or move it in any way
Also, if it is displaced upwards, if not hidden inside, because you will find it immediately by touch
This method of dislocation is not sufficient to restore it, when it is new, or when the patient is suffering
The method is that the physician holds the patient’s hand down, then places his thumbs under the shoulder blade, and holds the joint firmly upwards at the root; And the minister holds the hand, and extends it upwards, because he puts on gloves. if there comes an illness.
and if it does not come as we have said above, if you know that the patient is immersed in warm water; and the minister gives soft and soothing nourishment, such as decoction of alum and fennel and honey in water, and the like
then put the patient on his back, put on gloves of linen of the same size, not too tight or too loose, then put the thumb of the hand on the cushion, and hold the shoulder firmly, and treat the hand of the patient
and another minister holds the chief of the patient, so that it does not move backwards; That shoulder is back now, and if you see that it has been reset thus far,
It has returned to its place now, and if you see that it has been reset like this so far, and that you make it stay present in this home which is greater than the patient; then let the patient rest for a while beside the cost, and let the shoulder hang down from the patient’s side, and keep the patient’s head up, so that the patient hangs there like that. and another attendant treats the patient’s hand behind the belly And when it is regained, in whatever way, if you put a ball of wool of equal size under the armpit, then put the plaster on the abscess with powdered oatmeal, with incense and egg-white, on the whole shoulder and around, and strain the armpit outwards again, and bind the limb over the plaster, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still.</start_of_turn>
And the reset is done in another way too.
and it is done by grasping the limb with a long cushion in the earth, from which the head of the shoulder is just as round as a ball, and is neither too thick nor too thin; Then let the patient lie down, but that he have a cloth of wool above, and that the patient be at rest for a long time.
Then extend his arm upwards from the other side, and the joint will return to its place immediately
and if it does not return by these means that we have said, if you do this cure: take two thumbs and three fingers wide, which have the head bent inwards so that it enters through the hole of the armpit, like this
then hold on the head of the arm the wool cloth that is above, so that it does not bleed the patient, and then put it over the armpit of the patient
and extend your arms upwards towards the chest, and hold the assistant on the arm, and the hand at the head of the arm, then put the arm on one inch of a handbreadth, and hold the thumbs and index finger downwards, and leave the rest hanging downwards: The jointure returns now.
And if you do all this, and it does not heal after twenty-five days, and the limb cannot be lifted, then know that the nerves of the shoulder are crushed or stretched or softened; and that the joint will never be fixed in its place again
And it is necessary that he move gently, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal better thus;
and then move again after five or seven days, and move it and if it is stiff and is not softened, it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And when the healing has passed, if there is stiffness in the limb and late mobility, if the patient uses the limb many times, as long as the stiffness is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
And if you do all this, and it comes loose after seven days, and the jointure does not stay in place, and cannot lift his upper arm, then the nerves of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened.</start_of_turn> and the jointure never stays fixed in its place.</start_of_turn
The dislocation which is towards the elbow, and the upper arm, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of the hands, and is administered with another bandage;
and heals as soon as it is set right.
And when you join the patient with the oil, if he can see it openly.
For the joint is crooked, and cannot hold the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
The swelling of the joint becomes loosened by blows, and again returns;
and has become loosened throughout, both front and back, and the dislocation does not recover, for it is seen and felt well because of excessive deformity And if it can be restored, when it is like this that you can bring it back, you must extend your hand with both hands; and let your arms be spread out, and your hands down toward your belly according to the patient’s situation, front and back, and hold the joint together with your thumbs and index fingers until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn> If the dislocation is in front, if it returns when the hand doubles over its hand, and the thumb is firm at the root that is deshydrated.
Therefore you must immediately reset it even if you must do it several times, for if you leave it alone it will worsen
And by chance it cannot be brought back whole, even when it is at the back. If it is worth more than the others, and causes greater pain, and by chance it comes to this, the patient dies.
If it is restored when it is like this, that you can bring it back, then you stretch out your hand with both hands. And the arms are spread out, and the hands down towards the belly as much as the pain will allow, from the outside and from the inside, and join the joint together with its pieces joined, or at the root of its bone, until it returns to its place
If he feels pain after the joint is reset, and it moves, bathe and rub well, and press until it is eased; or place upon the joint a fatty mutton nail, then leave it in for a night, and the bone, and wash; and when it sweats, gently wipe the joint, then put the nail back, and then wash again; do this twice or thrice until it is healed. If you see that it returns to its place, put upon it moist butter warmed with burr, and strain it; if it returns to its place.
And if it does not want to return to its place, give great extension;
And two assistants must extend the arm and hold it, so that it does not move during extension;
Then twist the arm from the shoulder downwards, and when you have enveloped a double-length and wide bandage around it.
And when you look at the joint at its joint, if the bone has any oil on it to smooth the joint, then hold the joint steady until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And when it is in its place, put on a dry plaster with egg albumin, and hold the arm to the patient’s chest, and leave it there for some days, and then remove it.</start_of_turn>
And if the joint is fixed in its place, leave it alone and leave it alone.</start_of_turn
And if you see that the joint does not heal well, repeat the plaster and the bandaging, and leave it in place until it is firmly fixed.</start_of_turn Then he lets go.
Then if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, bathe and massage thoroughly, and press until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a fat mutton marrow, then let it rest for a while, and a night, then the bone, and when you enter or bathe it.</start_of_turn> and when he sweats, wipe the joint gently, then put the marrow back on, and then enter or bathe.</start_of_turn and do this two or three times until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
and if you see it, put on a moist poultice soaked in butter, and strain it on.</start_of_turn
If it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I will look and put his hand on that appearance of the joint.
The shoulder joint has been dislocated and the return is easy, more than the others. However, it is necessary to reduce it immediately while it is still dislocated, even if the limb is swollen or if there is bleeding at the site
And you must place the affected limb on a table and extend the limb, and look that it is even, so that he places his palm on the surface of the joint and holds it until it returns to its place
However, you must watch if it is well back in place; Then put the patient’s hand behind his back on the table at extension and reduction. And when the limb is in its place, if you place the displacement that we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it in peace.</start_of_turn
If it comes back now, that is good. If not, if the strain of the supporting cushions has calmed after the incision, and you let it rest in its natural position, it will recover
And if it cannot bear it, and you do not put it back in its place after a few days, the joint will become stiff
neither does it harm the patient except as long as the limb is limp, and it cannot withstand any tension at all. therefore, if the nerves are cut or the artery;
if there is nothing else to be done except to drain by fire cautery, and by chance there is nothing else.
Never is the thumb detached from the wrist at the wrist-bone or at the palm or belly; therefore must the thumb stay fixed, and hold the dislocation back in their pouches until it returns, then support the head of the thumb, and guide it to the part where it is joined; and leave it for two days, and then put it back in its place; and do not touch it, as we have said, and withdraw from it, and make it move, and bind it; do this often, until it is straitened, and do the same if it is detached at the belly of the thumb, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is detached from another part.
and do the same if it is loosened from the shoulder.
When the shoulder blade or the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no remedy, for the patient’s life is in danger.
Never are the thumbs discharged from the wrist part, never at the back of the palm or in the belly.
then they are loosened, and the dislocation must be reduced from your armpits until it returns; then support the head of the thumb, and bring it towards the part where it is joined.
and leave it for two days, and then put it straight again;
and do not move it, as we have said, and take away the pain, and make it move, and bind it firmly
do it often, until it is firm, and do the same if it is discharged from the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed
And in the same way, do this when it is loosened from another side.
And that which comes from sitting or from blows or from similar things, they say that the old methods of treatment were with great words, which did not yield much; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before the heel, there is no healing; and that which comes directly on both sides, we cannot cure it except for that which comes from behind; as I have said; and that the patient’s face should be stretched out one inch wide, and should be strained from his knees up; then I take a fist and put it under the heel, and I put another hand over the toes, and I tie a thread around the patient’s ankle, and I take another hand and I take hold of the shin, and I tie two threads between the two toes; and let them be well closed, as I have said, and the patient should keep his palms on the spine until it returns.
And if the symptoms seem to be reversed, that is, if the swelling moves towards the joints, it cannot be held, and often makes the limb limp, or the two thighs or two arms or one leg limp.
Many times it moves to three parts;
The part which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The cure is that if the dislocation comes from childhood if there is no cure or healing of all
The one which comes from leaning or blows or similar things, they say is an old way of curing by great words, or there is no benefit at all in them.
But I have abridged it according to my intention, and have devised various instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes before the bite, there is no health to be found;
Likewise, what comes directly on two sides, one cannot cure fire except for that which comes from behind, as I say
And that the patient be extended on his face in one league equal, and have strain from his eyes, that he does not move.
Then I take hold of the fist at the shoulder in the earth form, and another has a piece, and I bind the linen around the belly of the patient, and another has haunches, and has knees, and has ankles;
And two ministers know the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two thumbs;
And be well closed, the thumb as we have said, and the eye looks puts its palms on the spine, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this treatment, take a thumb three fingers long, and support the base with your hand, and let the patient lie on their side, and hold the thumb base with your hand, and put the middle of the thumb on the spine; and put the eye their thumbs on the other head of the thumb, and press well, until it returns to its place
And if you see that it is turning at the wrist, do the loop that turns the hand. And it is that you hold two fingers at the head of the patient’s arm of great length, and on the piece two others, and between each finger, a suture and a dressing, a palm of space of length.
and between each finger there is one hole, or the knot is corrected, and the fingers are firmly fixed in the ground, so that they do not move.
and between the two fingers there is one turning, so that the limb turns, and there are two small fingers of a palm’s length at the turning; for the knot to hold
then the ligament which is among the armpits to the turning at the head, and the other ligament to the pieces at the other turning, and the fingers of the attendants turn their turning all along the limb, and the master puts the pin even as we have said.
And when they are even, put upon a dry patch with an abundance of oil, and then press, and then support with a tablet of three fingers’ length, that the redness of the swelling and the painful part of the ribcage, then bind with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient some nourishment secretly until they are healed.
And if nothing comes to an end of the sickness, if you must administer soothing and calming medicines, with the support that we have said before And never give a dose of poison, and never does the appearance of a swelling on the lower back or the loin indicate anything other than dislocation It is the bone that is open, for which we must have no presumption By chance death comes.
The joints of the hip and shoulder only come loose from dislocation, never from other parts;
The hip joint is loosened in three parts: frontally and backwards, and frontally and backwards.
The more forward it is, the more it is loosened in front and behind
When the limb is joined with the limb at the dislocation, if it is longer, and if the patient’s knee is greater than the thigh, it cannot bend his knee even with fire This is because the head of the humerus is dislocated from the socket, which is why the shoulder joint comes loose
If this semblance of dislocation persists, if it is an old dislocation, and it remains as it is without any cure; and one must not presume otherwise.
And the sign of the one who has it in front, if he has his limb well according to its completion; And thus, do not double the knee joint in pain, and if you see him do so, do not allow it before, and retain his urine, and swell his belly, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary to apply a strong minister, and keep the limb firm with two hands, or one, as you please; and another minister stretches out his hand above in part as much as he can stretch out his hands below his buttocks, then he grasps it with a loop of thread above the knee; and another holds the head of the limb; and they stretch up and down together until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains so
Return the patient to this semblance of dislocation if indeed the dislocation is old and persists according to its nature, if there is no remedy for it; and do not presume it
And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you hurry that you turn the joint, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it forward and backward; By chance if it returns, and there is no need for any other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, if you must force it, grasp it firmly with two hands, or with one hand that you must bind on the knee; and another helper extends his hand under in part as much as he can stretch out his hands below his buttocks, and then grasp it with a loop of thread on the hip and another holds the head of the limb.
and extend upwards and downwards at the same time, until the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains so hanging
When the dislocation is pushed out, if the patient lies still as we have said in the case of Gilbert, grasp the limb firmly with one hand and the heel with the other; then insert two fingers, one at the wrist and the other at the ankle, and press one finger between the thighs of the patient in the shape of a triangle; and plant damp cloths around, so that it does not bleed excessively, then extend the thumbs ministering to him, and the master looks at the patient’s hand to set the dislocation.
If this does not work, it is necessary to make an incision to his appearance.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder, if you can, soothe the patient over his costal cartilage, then place the limb on the root of the humerus, and the bone which is beside the scapula, and extend the limb upwards towards the scapula and towards the acromion.
then grasp another assistant by the arms, and embrace the great bone of the painful arm, and extend it towards the front: if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is less severe than the others.
And if you do not manage to fix it in this way that we have said, if you can, bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread above the two toes, and above the two knees, and let the painful limb be extended twice as much as the others.
Then either hang it above the head of a staff, or on two arms of length.
Then command the minister to grasp the head of the limb, and let another minister hang alongside the patient, who graspes the limb firmly, because the joint is now returning steadily.</start_of_turn>
And when the dislocation is loosened, if the patient is conscious, as we have said concerning embolism, grasp the limb properly above and below the painful area.</start_of_turn
Then put two cushions, one at the head and one at the foot, and insert one cushion between the limbs of the patient in the form of an X.</start_of_turn And place moist towels around it, so that it does not bruise the patient, and extend the thumbs of the ministers towards him, and the patient places his hand on the dislocation.</start_of_turn
And if the dislocation is pushed out, if it does not manage to extend the limb downwards, do not lift it up from the ground, but know that it must be as it was before the dislocation; as we have said concerning the two inches; and that it must be supported on its face, and the limb must be stretched as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; and it will be finished when the patient extends his leg, and they will be equal; then join the thighs and put on the dressing, and bind with a bandage, so that the limb does not move; and let it rest for three days or four, then take it off and put on the dressing again; and if you see that they are equal, if the bandage is as before, and leave it for three days; then take it off and make the limb relaxed, until the limb is comfortable.
And thus rests for two or three days, then releases and places the support over it; and if you see that they are even, if strained, as before, leave it for two days; then releases and make him blink attentively, until the limb is comforted.
And when the dislocation is forward, if you must, extend the affected limb strongly, as I have said. and place the eye of pain on the painful side, then press with the other hand, and extend the limb backwards towards the armpit.
And if the dislocation is backwards, if you cannot extend the limb backwards, do not lift it from the ground, but rather keep it as it was dislocated backwards, as we have said above about the two fingers; or be on its face, and the limb is stretched as we have said above, and must press on the joint at the table; and will be known when the patient extends his limb, and they will be even; Therefore join the thighs, and put the cushion in place, and strain a bandage tightly, so that the limb does not move. and rest for three days or four, then remove it, and put the cushion back on
and if you see that they are even, if the strain is as before, and leave for three days
then remove it, and let him breathe easily, until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not displaced, if an extension is administered strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways: namely, forward and backward, and downward;
and do not damage the front part.
And the sign is that you order the patient to bend his limb towards his thigh, and if he does not feel it towards his thigh, his muscles are dislocated;
And restore all of them if you make the patient sit upright, and extend his limb if he can, and place your hand on his face, and put his thumb on your knees.
Then take his shoulder joint at your palms, and pull between your thumbs, and fold the two ribs of his shoulder joint together And another attendant extends his thumb, until the shoulder joint returns to its place, and the sign is that his limb is properly aligned with his thigh slightly bent
Put on the dressing and make the limb swell at the thigh, and keep it bound for three days or four, and then take it off
And do not move the patient any more, until the limb is comfortable.
And the sign is if the ankle is loosened, and try before towards the part where it is loosened: bring it back if it is slight, and extend it slightly with your hands when it is slightly stretched only.
And when it is thoroughly dry, if you think you have set the limb straight, hold the patient firmly by the leg above the ankle; then pull the limb towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and hold it firmly; do this twice as we have said, slowly pulling and stretching; if it returns, that is well; if not, repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return, make the patient lie face down on the ground, and fix his heel firmly on the ground between his thighs, and put a bandage around it, so that it does not bleed the patient; then hold the patient’s thigh, and another helper extend the limb with your hands or at the wrist, which is on the ankle; then extend the ankles of the helpers equally, and hold the limb firmly either between the patient’s thighs to keep the patient steady when extending it; then put the eyes equally on the dislocation with your hands, and another helper holds the limb steady at the ankle, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And when it comes to a boil, if you put on the dressing and stamp on it, and the swelling forms, and you bind the limb to the leg, and keep the nerves which are above the ankle behind, so that they are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling subsides, if the strain is gone; then remove the dressing in a third or fourth part, and warn the patient for three days; and if he goes before this limit, it is not certain that he will not damage himself further.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and that it swells up before at the part where it is dislocated.
If the swelling is slight, it must be gently extended with the hands when it is only slightly swollen.
And when it is thoroughly dried out, it must be made to sit upright; and hold the patient firmly by the limb under the ankle
then take the thumb to your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, and then stretch upwards, and keep the limb well stretched out
and do this twice, as we have said, with the heel bent and the limb pulled out
if it returns, it is well done
If not, if you begin again, for it will return.
If it cannot return, if you make the patient lie face down on the ground, and press his heel firmly to the ground between his thighs, and tie a cloth around his waist, that he does not move the patient; and let him rest.
Then hold the limb at the elbow, and another assistant extends the limb at the wrist or at the shoulder, that it lies on the collarbone of the limb; and let him rest Then extend the thumbs of the assistants evenly, and pass the pack either inside between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when he is extended; and let him rest.
Then put the eyes equally on the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant grasps the limb at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And when it [the dislocation] is at a point, if you place the padding and bind above, and the strain forms, and you tie the limb to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, that the ligature is not too tight.
then leave it for two or three days, and if the strain relaxes, if the tension;
then loosen it after a third or a fourth, and tell the patient to sleep for three days; and if he goes before this time, it is not certain that he will not be deformed forever.
And if the dislocation is not in any knot of the limb, then you must make the patient sit on one leg or on the ground quite straight, and put your limb on what is open of these joints, and press your limb firmly until it returns; and when it is even, and there is no opening, if you put on the dressing of the limb two fingers, then the strain forms, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and rest it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When there is wound and dislocation together, When a wound accompanies a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies: if you are not mindful of me and do not know how to cure it, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and timely, do not be bold; and begin with gentle treatments to the wound, and leave the patient in the hands of the Lord, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you restore the limb to its place, even if the wound has burst; and when the limb is restored, if you administer gentle treatments to the wound, and cure the wound, as it should be, from dried pus; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and bones are broken, if the bones are fractured, do as we have said in simple illnesses; and you must abstain from pride, as I have said, for this is harmful to you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your soul and body.
And if the dislocation is not in any place of the limb, if you must make the patient sit on one knee or on a bench quite upright, and put your limb on what is open of these joints, then press your limb until it returns
And when they are even, and nothing is open, if you put two ounces of rue marigold on a table at two joints, then the pain will grow, and you must leave it for three days, and then remove it. and rest it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Of wound and dislocation together.
When wound is associated with dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times it happens that the patient dies.
if you are not modest in the treatment, and if you do not understand the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and timely, do not be rash;
and use soothing things first and afterwards, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if you first reset the limb in its place, as the apostemes were before;
and when the limb is in place, if you administer soothing things afterwards, and treat the wound, as it seems appropriate, with desiccant ointments
And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and the bones are broken, if the bones themselves, do as we have said in simple diseases.
And take care not to enter into fear, as I have said, for this will bring you misery according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body.
