O you, very dear sons, I have finished this book which is the end of the science of medicine, assembled from its teachings and pronouncements. And it came to pass that I realized I must accompany this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely surgery.</start_of_turn>
And because the work of hands is fraught in our region and is strange to all, if the science is lost and forgotten, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have performed.</start_of_turn And from this arises the error and the emptiness, and are closed the understandings and is displaced the science.</start_of_turn
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation. Or it seems to me that I shall make it alive together the ordination of this physician according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the fire cautery instruments and other tools of the work with the agreement of the declaration and preparation of the patient, as it is necessary.
Or it seems to me that I shall make it live altogether the order of this physician according to the way of exposure and declaration and of the abbreviation; and I shall join together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.</start_of_turn> And it is necessary that he who enters this field should be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he has grasped the judgment of limbs, and the forms and the joints and the separations of things, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and their number, and the structure and the veins moving and resting, and their issue.</start_of_turn>
And thus Ypocras said that we must not trust the word of the patient alone, but with the work it is indeed so. and indeed in the art of the hand.
As we have said at the beginning of this book, whoever is not familiar with the things that are before him, if he is rash and does not notice the homes, will certainly err
Because I have often seen more of these things that interfere with this science and if they abandon science and common sense.
For I have seen fools who have coped with scrofules or a woman’s neck, and have coped the arteries of the neck; because so much blood has flowed out that the woman has died between her hands.
And I have seen another fool who has treated a stone of a sick person, and the stone was great; If he pulls out a piece of the bladder with it, and was sick for three days.
And thus I have already been called to treat it, and I saw the disposition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and if it were cut out it would surely die.</start_of_turn>
And thus another madman who took charge of our land who had his leg broken, and with the swelling caused a wound;
And his foolish blindness held the swelling above the wound as tightly as stars by strong binding, and did not let blood escape from the wound, and left it until the end
And he commanded that it should not be loosened from me
And so it happened that his leg was completely shattered and the limb and the heel were lost to perdition.
I went to call for him, and I hurried to unbind the limb; And when I see it dislocated and there is no pain.
But every way the corruption has already been confirmed or the limb is already ruined, and I cannot heal it.</start_of_turn>
and it continues to corrupt until the limb is entirely lost.</start_of_turn
And thus another mire which undermines the bone marrow swells, and then inflames from the malice of its lordship.
For cancer, when it is pure of melancholy humor, does not yield except when iron is touched upon it unless all the corrupted parts can be removed.
Therefore, for this reason, very skillful physicians, you must know that the work of the hands is divided into two divisions:</start_of_turn that is to say, with regard to huevos or when there is danger in other positions.</start_of_turn
and I will show in each chapter where there is doubt and danger.</start_of_turn>
For you must take care that the fools do not speak badly of you.</start_of_turn>
If you grasp your arms tightly and undertake your patients gently and firmly, and use the right way, so that by the grace of God your return shall be in peace and health.
and leave the sick with hope of healing without grief
keep your arms from that which makes you doubt, and be strong in your spirit so that you can come from this world to the next in peace
Glory be praised for its wonders Do not take my word for it in treating the sick, for I am not a madman
I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapters are about cauteries of fire and of medicine, and this chapter orders from the head down to the toes
And of the forms of instruments, and of the tweezers of cautery, and of everything that is necessary for the work.
And of the chapters following, some are on the cutting and piercing of the skin, and of blisters and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
And this chapter orders and describes the instruments.
The next chapter is on restoring dislocations and fractures, and similar things
And it orders from the chief head down to the toes, and describes the instruments.
As we have remembered from the work, it is necessary to say the quality of the aid and the great discomfort of great complexion.
I say that the quality of the assistant, and prudence, is the longest word and the subtlest science and the secret response
And concerning this, they spoke of many wounds, and they agreed on that.
And I am silenced by their words, for I am ashamed of my length.
I say that the cautery is useful for all complexions, where there is matter, for it is a complex skill: it is a knowledge of complexion hot and dry matter, and complexion cold and wet matter
In complexion hot and dry combined with matter, divide neither one nor the other, and say that the cautery is a great aid and the other say the opposite: that the cautery is only useful for diseases caused by heat and dryness For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And thus it is known that the cautery which is done on the contrary to this, greatly helps in hot and dry diseases that arise from the humours of the body. For when you compare the body of a man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body dry.</start_of_turn
And I consent to this word. For I have never seen it happen before in practice.</start_of_turn>
And thus it is known that no one understands the fire except those who have experienced it, and who know by long experience the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of humours of the body, and the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and the issues and space of tension.
we do not have our fear from other humours, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the more must they agree to the cautery.
And know this, sir, that cautery with fire is more effective for secret cures than burning cautery.
For fire is simple, and brings no further heat than to the member that is being cauterized, and harms no other member save its name.</start_of_turn>
Warm medicines come from one member to another by communicating, and cause the member to suffer from grief in order to bring about healing and sometimes cause the patient to suffer
The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make me do this, if there is no excess.
And this I have learned through experience and by the length of my service and the study I have made of this art, and it is confirmed by the truth of things.</start_of_turn>
And for this reason I apologize for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to hide the secret which is enclosed or the fire, and the quality of the work, as it dispels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates in demonstrating; or it follows in your thoughts.</start_of_turn>
Know, son, that it is necessary to determine at what tension the cautery should be made, and when they are pricked.</start_of_turn>
And I say that cautery is useful in all cases, for the harmful things which arise are driven out by the aid of the cautery.</start_of_turn And in the same way, if the cautery is applied for necessary and urgent pains that cannot endure the tension until a greater harm befalls the limb.
And do not think, my son, as some fools do; for the disease which is cured by cautery has no return; it is said thus.
it is said thus. but it is not so that it cures them, for the cautery is only a medicine that alters the complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and is worth no more than medicine for its haste, and for the worth of its work and its sovereignty.
and indeed that the disease does not come at any time according to the complexion of the patient and the limb of the disease and its virtue
And in him are collected the superfluous humors by the acquisition of foods and other things, if these are not cauterized when administered either in liquid or solid form, for there is still excess of humors and moisture; as for cauteries of tendons because of pain, and other things, and some pain does not return. but this is not without fault.
And many people do not understand this because cauteries are called behind medicine, and it is seen;
but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their understanding is false, for it is cauteries that are behind medicine because whenever we administer other treatments in any disease and they do not help, we then administer the cautery, and it is worth it
Therefore, even though cautery is behind medicine, it does not please the minds of fools.
The old folks say that gold cautery is more wondrous than iron, and they tell of no fire save for the excellence of the gold and the height of its substance.
They say that the smell of the cautery of gold does not make one faint, but I have seen it prove otherwise, for I have seen many people faint from it;
Gold cautery is more valuable than iron, as some claim However, when you burn gold instruments, you do not know how much they have been scorched by the color of gold and how much they have cooled down.
If you burn them too much They become red-hot; And thus there is enough hindrance.
Or you have commanded this chapter from beginning to end, so that the patient may see that the matter is more manageable.</start_of_turn>
These olive cauteries are useful for moisture and for cold on the brain, and there are two reasons for their use: one is a disease called "soda," and the other is the accumulation of many humors that descend from the head as sweat, and from the ears, and from a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and even from many diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar diseases.
And thus the form of this cautery is such that the patient is purged by means of medicine that modifies the head three times or four, according to what is useful and agreeable to the patient's custom; for the patient can endure it. And then make the patient reattach the head of the limb.
And then make him sit between your hands, and put his hands under his belly;
Then put the root of your thumb on the root of his elbow between his two fingers; And thus, or otherwise, your two means will come to me, if it bleeds from the nail then withdraw the cautery which is called "olivare," for thus it is formed. And take out the splinter that signifies ink, and make it descend and extract your hand back and forth, holding it steady; Then keep your hand still, and reinsert the splinter if you see the bone slightly exposed; And if you do not see it, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you
And then take again a little thread, and put on gloves and cotton wool inside, and take out the splinter, and leave it for three days.
And then put on a soft bandage on the wound. and leave them until the scab is ossified. and leave them until the scab of the wound which is called "tetrafarmaçon" is healed
and they say that the older ones say that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges. for thus is the cause of help with the muscles
And they say that the fire cautery should be left on for as long as part of the bone is not burnt, and then remove what is superfluous from the bone, and be cured.</start_of_turn>
and they say that the other thing that must be done is to leave the cautery on for a longer time and press very hard so that from the bone outwards as wide as I see women put in their braids for this reason that the humors come out of the muscles outside;
and must leave the wound open for a long time then must cure and dress the wound
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all cases, for in some individuals there may be fear or danger.
indeed I believe I must leave it undone.
for the head of the shoulder is easily loosened by continuous action of the same nature, as we have seen in other members;
and when the head of the shoulder is weakly affected by nature, the first semblance of cautery appears more useful and less painful for me, and in this case I shall abstain from it.
When there is chronic pain lasting a long time, the patient must use herbs, pills called "cochie", and vomiting of the head and oil enemas and plasters And if you do the cautery as we have said before, it is of no avail. Take heed that if the patient’s condition is severe and not too frail... ...then perform the cautery as we have mentioned above.</start_of_turn> Afterwards, make the cautery on the skin of the shoulder joint up to the bone, as we have said before, and make an incision or puncture where it is called the “vessel”; and put sponges there where it is necessary.</start_of_turn> and keep your hand still so that you do not see blood until the bone is reached.</start_of_turn the patient experiences much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later.</start_of_turn
And it is known that the cautery of horns is more subtle than that of the hair of the head, and this is the form:
Dou cautere dou chief. And it is known that the cautery of horns is more subtle than that of the hair of the head, and this is the form: When he makes cautery, he does it in two ways, that is to say by means of medicine or by fire.
If he does the cautery by medicine, if you take a dose of alum, and open the skin and cover it I as much as possible, and then put the thumb or the place where the pain persists until you can restore the dose of alum from the leather;
And when it is restored, if you bind it and strain it well and leave it for twelve hours. Then take out the dressing and apply pressure to the dose of alum, and leave the wound for two or three days. Then put on a cold compress tightly bound over the wound until swelling is reduced.
After the treatment of the wound as long as it is healthy;
And if you see that you need to do nothing else but apply some of the medicines I have written or dose them, treat with those medicines which are sufficient.
The iron cautery is thus to be performed in this manner. Leave the hairs long and even on the patient.
It is called "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a loop or it has little curvature, and in the middle has a small projection;
and take out the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently move the fire until half of the thickness of the hair is burnt away.
And keep your hand away from the artery from being burnt, which is dangerous, and discharge an abundance of blood.</start_of_turn>
After put cotton around it for a space of three days; remove the limb from the wound Then I put a moist cotton wad in the wound, and then cure the swelling until it is healed;
And if you return to cauterize this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare", at its very tip, and you keep covering the artery in this abscess which is not ancient.
After placing cotton on the shoulder, draw out the limb for two and a half days. Then place moist cotton in the pit, and cure the limb of swelling until it is sound. If you wish to cauterize this embolism with the cautery that is called "cultellare," at the tip, and hold the artery in this embolism that is not ancient.
When you treat the abscess as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery must precede medical treatment and that it does not suffice, then you must abstain from the cautery called "cultellare" while it is painful
and sign with this that the wound has a half-line of length, and rest your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not cause harm to the bone
Leave the mandible undisturbed when it is still, and do not move it until it has regained its original position; and prevent spasm from coming to the patient. Beware of excessive bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or when there is great fear and uncertainty, even among those who are learned and experienced. Leave the work in mid-stream;
But I will tell you how to staunch the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is written
And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the surrounding area as much as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed
And if you see it, administer the cautery that we have said or the surgeon of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two handles. And these cautery are better than those and more helpful.</start_of_turn>
If you see that this cautery does not suffice for the ailment, and the patient is languid, cauterize the surrounding area as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see that, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has a.ij. cuts; and this cautery is better than the previous one and more helpful.
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and there is overgrowth of resolving medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not change, then remove this cautery which is called the "points," for this is its form:
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the two places where the pain persists in both, and you have moved a little piece under the root of the ear when you have signed the mark.</start_of_turn And there are ten points around the cheek of the ear.</start_of_turn
After treating the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn
After pricking all around the painful ear, or around the joints if the pain persists in both, and you pull out a hair at the root of the ear as soon as you feel the mark of the puncture; and there are ten hairs around the ear; after that cure the wound until it is healed.
Torture that must be treated by cautery is not fierce except for those that move mucus, as we have said in the sections on diseases.</start_of_turn
And make no burnings as if they came from drying and swelling of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture which comes from humidity of drool and vomiting of blood and hiccups, and this is not worth it, then you must burn the patient three times with the cautery. One on the root of the ear, and the other between the eyebrows, and the third in the space between the two eyebrows
Put the cautery on the healthy side and burn at the base of the ear under a mark one thumb’s breadth from the edge of the ear, and one at the temple as long as a thumb; And leave the cautery on for as long as half of the hair is burned;
And this is the form of the fire cautery:
And it is like the form of a butter knife that we have put before you, but it is a little more subtle and it is better that the knife be a little thicker;
After curing like I have said before, as long as it is sound.
When the apoplexy is ancient and you cure it like we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make three cauteries: Two on the two corners of the head, and one I embrace the head, and I burn where it is called the "vessel" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach
And thus be cured as we have said before.
From idleness.
And thus be cured as we have said before.
And thus be cured as we have said before
and this is the manner of the cautery if you do as I have said
If he is well-minded, be well; and if he is not well, make three cauteries of the head downwards until the juice comes down to the collar, and leave a space between each cautery of one thumb’s breadth
and cure as the others, and if you see blood, and the patient is fainting, make one cautery in the middle; If the head of the shoulder is displaced, and two others above the two corners, and the limb is cured until it is sound.
Or, if the burn is called "olive," as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be freed from hairs and from what has been said before
After that, the patient must be made to sit up, and then the burn is made on the head and under the cheek, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck
And if there is more pain, and the limb is moist and the patient is gasping, and the disease is violent, two burns are made on the spine of the back And let them remain as long as the greater part of the burn is still raw, and keep your hand steady After the wound has healed, and if the cautery called "olivare" is to be used which we mentioned before.
It is inappropriate to request translations of medical texts from the Middle Ages, as their medical practices and terminology may differ significantly from modern medicine.
Epileptics should only use fire cautery when it is fluid; first modify the patient’s head and other cures that we mentioned in the preceding section when the patient is large and prone to excessive medical treatment.
And if it is a young child who cannot endure the suffering, let him gargle and chew coarsely with soft bones to soften the brain often with bones of meat;
After the head has been laid in the middle, and I make the cautery as we said before, and I make the cautery on the vessel and on the chest bone And if the patient is strong and suffering, I make the cautery as we said to those who have paralysis and softening of the bones, on the spine of the back and the neck, and the cautery "olivare" as we mentioned before.
If the patient is a child, make an incision slightly as I have mentioned previously.
When melancholy is the cause, there are superflous or corrupted humors and thick mucus, then make incisions as I have said to those who have paralysis.
If by reason of melancholy the superfluousness of the declining melancoly is caused, and the body of the patient is moist, then he must drink something that will refresh the brain, whatever is before him in the division.
After that, the patient must raise the chief of his body. after that, make a circle with the arm well stretched out, as if you were circling around the head; if you put it in at the root, the head will stay in place.
and the patient will feel his arm crossed, and keep it firmly held from all sides;
then present the limb, and let it rest on an old burr of barley and keep the fire moderate, so that he can tolerate it; afterwards pull out the circle from under the head, and let the head cool down
and do this to the patient every week once with another good government until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
If you see the burn prick at its root, hold the eyes steady until they grow
This method of cautery soothes the brain immediately.
and then puts on moist cotton wool in the burrow and in fat of gelatin.
De l’awe des eulz. When awe first arises, there are signs which I have said in the division. Then command the patient to drink something which will temper the head, ward off all moisture, and cause sweating or bathing several times a day.
Then he instructs him to recline his head, and makes the burn at the root of the head, and makes two burns on the two temples whenever he descends from awe as two eyes together, or if he descends from awe is in one;
and closes all the veins and arteries that are around the head, and let the burn be long as the width of the temple;
and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood spurting, if it is stained with parts poor as you have
And I will teach you how to extract arteries and how to cauterize wounds;
never do you cauterize or burn bones at the back of the II bones.
and you see that it is cold phlegmatic moisture, then you must cauterize as I said at the beginning of this chapter when the eyes are closed as the tears fall downwards: I cauterize the head and two cauterize on the two temples, and two cauterize or burn bones at the back of the two bones; And if it is necessary more, if the burn cautiously from under the eyebrow at every little burn.
When you have treated according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three eggs to drink; After that, raise the head, and burn with half or olive oil burn. And make two burns on the eyebrows, one between the eyebrows and below the nose
Be careful not to touch the artery
And this is the form of cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the marrow of the bone is softened by disease and moisture, then this cautery called "olivare" is applied The iron cautery is thus to be performed in this manner
If you see that two burns are made on the eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are,
Do not leave the hand until a third of the hair has been burned away, as I have said before
since the hair prick at their base. Never before have I seen that the hairs of the oils are converted into beards, prick the oil, and do cause cautery in two ways. It is known that of fire, or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
When they are born and even, then put the patient in a comfortable position after having signed on the edge of the eyes a mark that is as much like the fuel of the mustard as the beginning of the sign of the hairs;
Then I put a moist cotton wad in the yolk of an egg and a mixture of persicon on the oil, and then I cover the cautery with this. This is the form:
After cauterizing at the sign you have indicated several times, that the hairs should be as they were originally at that place.
And the sign of the work’s health is that you see the marrow receding, and the hairs are raised to the point of the oil.
Then keep your hand still and leave it for three days, and then I put a moist cotton wad in the burrow until the scab is bony. After the treatment of the inflammation until it is healed
And if after that the hairs come out, and the marrow is softened, then repeat the cautery on the same place as before
If the hairs are plucked out, if the cautery is performed while the hair root remains in its natural position, and is even, do not prick the hair with the oil.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, and then make parchment of the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Then take soap from France and chalk, each a third, and grind them together well; And make it hot, if it does not cool, then place it over the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put on the hair root and if the patient holds it only with oil, if you must work on it, and if it is in both places; And put some soft cotton wool in the egg-cup.
And the head of the sufferer should be in its normal position and put your thumb on the medicine, and press slightly whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels the bite just as from fire.</start_of_turn>
When you have done this for a long time, if bone is the remedy that you must seek. When the bite has passed, if you lift the limb up, and you see the flesh raised just as if it had been raised by contraction of fire or by incision.</start_of_turn> And if it is firm, it is well.</start_of_turn
If this is not the case, repeat the application of the medicine on the limb or the medicine has not taken effect, until your works are even and your eyes are fixed in place.</start_of_turn
Then put on a damp cloth in the armpit until the pain has gone; after that cure the swelling which is called "dyafenis" and others, while it is sound.
And if you have taken great care of your limb with great care that it does not require any more medicine, because your eye is fixed.
And if the swelling becomes softer afterwards, and the hair prick in the oil, if the medicine is recommenced on that limb which was softened by the swelling beforehand; after that cure while it is sound.
and this is the form of the fuelle d’olive.
And know that the oil of homes is diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to that is your constraint;
And let not the right response be to him who studies this art.
And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to that be thy constraints; and do not reply by the straight way to that one who studies this art.
And know that if we have said in the divisions of diseases that the cure of fistula is not useful, then you must cauterize according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in its normal position. and hold his ears firmly between your hands in such a way that they do not move, do not let go of his head
after put cotton wool soaked in egg white or in lime juice on the oil
then warm the cautery which is divided
and if it is placed at the head like the shape of a goose quill, bind so that the cautery is fixed
if you see, if either side of the head is pointed towards the other, and if you see, if it is as if with a thrust
But all that, which is a shepherd’s work, is worth more than your work.
When the fistula has been pressed and opened, and the pus and dry matter have been removed. and if closed, if the wound, and drive out the wound;
Then put on the hot cautery, and keep your hand on the cautery at the part where there is no fat under the oil, so that your hands do not make rashness and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be well. If this does not suffice, if you must repeat the cautery once more, and another if you have occasion, and leave it for three days.
After I have put on a moist cotton compress in the burrow, and the cure for desiccation lasts until it is healed, and while forty days pass until it is healed, if I put on an acrid medicine until the bone is exposed. and the patient should comply with what is said in his book.
And there is a manner of cautery for fistula of which none of the ancients have spoken With the fistula, and open the limb. After I have put in the wound the subtle camphor which is in this form: and I do it in the amount of three grains of plum and keep your hand or camphor firmly, and do not move the patient, except the softened plum does not adhere to its oil
And you must put upon the patient oil with cotton wool soaked in vinegar or wine.
The limb becomes swollen if the fistule is large, and the healthy part for marvel is to be preserved for salvation.
And if the fistula is cured by the cautery as we have said, then it is well. And if not, if you must administer an opening to the fistula, and bring it back to its original place as it should be in its proper place.
in limb bones Many times crevasses occur in limbs which are called "hair", and even in limbs of children.
When you treat these fractures in the way we have mentioned in the sections, and the cure does not help, then you must make a small cautery burn according to this form:
And you must keep the patient in those cavities until they are healed;
After treatment, the limb must be sound
When swelling comes to the root of the limb or the navel, or the palate, or the root of the teeth, after that it causes decay and swelling and becomes a fistula and you must treat it as we have said in the sections, and it bears no fruit Therefore you must cauterize according to the quantity of the fistula; After the bath or the opening of the fistula, hold your hand as long as the hand remains alive at the front or at the back.
And do it once or twice more, after the treatment of what we have said in treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is healed, that is good. and if this is not the case, if you must uncover the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your book
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines that do not work, then put the patient’s head in your hand after wiping off the cautery which will come afterwards in this part as if you put a bandage over the tooth
And put the cautery on the host immediately, and hold your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth.
After that, withdraw your hand and repeat the cautery as you please.
Then fill the patient’s mouth with dirty saliva, and hold it for an hour and a quarter with force.
And in part, when it moves thus, if confirmed, and the joint softens, restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
And in part, when it moves thus, if confirmed, and the joint softens, restrains, and the moisture corrupts dries.
When there is pain in the tooth from cold, or if there is cold or heat, and medical cures do not help, then there must be recourse to cautery in two ways: cautery of soot and fire cautery
The soot cautery is like taking a lump of charcoal and holding the end in a spoon of iron or tin; After taking the cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a bandage, and the moisture in the burr is softened, and put on the tooth that is aching urgently and hold it until it is cool.
And so do it often until the warmth of the remedy reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that the moisture of the wool and cotton in the burr is rough, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the cap so that the fire of the cautery reaches the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
The fire of the cautery is like that of a iron or a spider, and be large enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.</start_of_turn>
After the cautery is heated, so that its form will come afterwards, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cool.</start_of_turn
Fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.
Do it often, for the pain will be severe either today or tomorrow. And it must be known that the patient should fill his mouth with thick mucus in the haste of this cautery, and then pull out the hair forcefully.
This is the form of the fire cautery:
And do the cautery as you wish, and according to what you have seen;
This is the form of the caustic balsam
And the size on the pierced wound and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there are some of these wounds or chieftains or it has no moisture, and of those wounds which I cauterize or chieftain from an old woman; and find the wound just like a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break it; and if no blood comes out, it is just as well to make a wound like a stone. In other wounds that come from chieftains and have roots of ears, it overturns if it is kept too long, for it makes the wound worse. And it cures as it should. When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then uncover the cautery head so that this side will be free, and there will be two openings to let out the fumes from the other side
And place the cautery directly on the abscess once, or if it interferes, until it reaches the front of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, put the cautery on according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in place for three days And put on moist cotton in the wound as long as the bone is assured
After treating the bone and the wounds until they are healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels due to a cold complexion, then you must first remove the patient from these things with soothing medicines
After that, make the cautery at the root of the neck, and keep it so that you do not go deeper than the neck, and do not break the skin any further than necessary
After that, do another cautery at the joint of the collarbone to the head of the scapula, and let the cautery which is called the "clavile" be like the one we saw before.
and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When all and diseases of the pores are of cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and is an old disease, if you do two cauteries on the forcele in the veins.</start_of_turn and another cautery between the two nipples.</start_of_turn
and let the cautery which is called the "clavile" be like the one which is before us.</start_of_turn
And if you see it, perform cautery at the point where the cautery is called "points" for in this case it is like that in the disease of the ears.
and be the points just to XXX, or until they are bent over.
After that, cure the limb as we have said above, and let the cautery be done three times according to this shape:
And for these two are the lighter cauteries, because you make two at a time.
De la dislocation de l’ajutoire.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Then soothe the patient on his back and on his chest; Then take hold of the thumb which is inside the ear with your left hand;
and if the joint is loosened inside, if it is grasped with the cautery which has two needles without doubt in this case:
burn the thumb until it reaches the chest, and would come out with three cauteries together;
And for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery which has three nerves, because the figure of cauterization is made up of three cauteries.
and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a limb, and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves.
And never is it adjusted upon this vein because there are six cautery marks upon it.
After putting on the cautery, broil the area with silk; After that, rest the patient, and do not move the limb too long until it is well comfortable
And if it is dislocated below, whatever the cause, do a cautery on the thickness of the clamp cautery, or do several pricks.</start_of_turn
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is bony, and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come cold chills and moisture as much as they are expelled from their complexion, and are multiplied by customary treatments, it does no good; therefore it is recommended that the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and arms. And thus make three cauteries: one on the hip bone below the knee for the quantity of an egg, at the root of the cautery, and two on the two sides as far as the figure of the cautery is at a right angle, and has a space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they are moving together
And let the fire cautery if necessary touch two parts of the knee, and let the cautery figure be like this in shape, as it is arranged.
And if you see cautery with a large cautery in the stomach like this in shape;
and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize at the point and sign on the stomach just as much as you see of its extent then cauterize all the cautery that is called "points".
After the treatment of the ailment that we have seen before, while it is still sane.
When the liver comes with pain of fruit and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced from its natural complexion by the superfluities; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit from it, if you do not make the patient convalesce on his habitrail; And the sign of three fingers burned with cautery shall be performed in this form, this figure, and this quantity upon the liver, to drive away the hypocondria, so that from that moment the spleen or the belly of the man comes.
And there shall be space between each burn the thickness of a hazelnut. And let the burns be long as bones, and do not press me your hand to the whole burn
And let the burns be as thick only as half a hair, and let the patient lie down on his side;
And if he cannot, if so be it, extend his legs, and keep his arms extended
If you are obstinate, if these cauteries are too sweet, if you are subtle and learned in this art, take care that you do not burn the whole body, for you will burn all the flesh. If you do not take care, it will come to boiling, for the hair is very subtle in this place, and the scaldings will show.
When there is swelling of the liver, and you know if it is in the fat of the liver or in the flesh: if it is in the fat, the patient feels little pain;
And if it is in the armpit, if he feels intense pain.
And when this treatment is finished, if it is known that the patient is cured of his head;
Then he must seize the limb or the wound, and then he must heat the cautery which is similar in shape to a needle. And burn the cautery as long as the hairs are black, and come until the wound is fully healed;
After the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed
And one must know that this cautery is only used for strong pains that have been studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and by which hands these diseases have never cured before
Therefore, he dares not work, and in truth it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone
of chest pain
The ancient said that we must make to weep carbuncles of root of aristologist, and in part manner. Take a root of aristologist which is long, the greatest that you can find, and let it dry, and make it as thick and long as your thumbs; and mix it with oil, and mark it with fire, and cauterize the cautery between the thumb and the little finger, and two small cauteries on the side descending towards the beard area
and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the hip bone, declining behind a little space. and one cautery on the palm of the hand, and another on the stomach, and one between two spaces, and two as two ribs go beyond the cautery which is between two spaces
Do not press me too hard, for I open just as readily as when smelling.
And they say that no ancient person uses a fire cautery resembling a barber’s razor, and puts the poultice and the fleece between the ribs, until it comes to this incision; And the fire leaps out with pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or an abscess forms which cannot be healed.
of mice.
When you treat the disease of the mouse of what we have said in regard to the divisions of the cures, and it does not help, then there remain two methods of cautery which are both good.
When you grasp it three times or four, or more, as you must do in accordance with the length of the hair, in accordance with the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before.
Do not press me too hard with the entire cautery, and let the patient go out from under his skin;
And another way of cautery is if you are afraid of the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
And keep the hand which is at the place of the mouse, or the elbow of the patient comes from the left, and be the elevation which you support the hand as much as the hand, as much as the length of the bone, and the cautery as much as the width of the bone.
Then after that the two nerves are inflamed as much as the hand is perceived from the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and you will see there are three holes
And if you see that, if you burn the whole cautery with three nerves.
After that, when the burn has got a long tension, and this is worth as much as the other burns mentioned before.
The burn is not worth like water, except for the method that is called "asclytes".
When you have cured him as we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit him, then you must make four cauteries around the buttock, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the groin, and two behind the shoulder blade on the spine, and one on the heel. Or make the cauteries very close to the edge of the wound.
Leave the cautery open to prevent infection for a long time, and do not leave the wound covered from the patient after the cautery And if healing is hastened, and the two ends are brought together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the nail which we have before showing it. And thus, for the back, if olive oil is applied, as it is here before mentioned.
When the pieces are inflamed in the hypochondriac zone and are full of yellow bile, it is appropriate that you cauterize on the back of the heel between the auriculacle and the annular And keep your hand with the cautery towards that side
And do not enter too deeply into the wound, because it would cause the yellow bile to spurt; and do the cautery in this fashion:
After that, make two cauterizations in the groin in the crease of the thigh at the point of the coccyx And let the cautery be of a suitable length, one below the front knee and the other below the back, between the thigh
And leave the cauteries over a long distance so that the bile flows freely
After the treatment of the other cures that we have mentioned.
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the protective and digestive virtue which is the stomach and the intestines is evacuated, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and feeling very green, if you give him a great cautery on the stomach as it has been said above or a cautery of the stomach, the cautery travels around and there are three cauteries around the spleen at all the nails of the spleen, and two cauteries on the flanks.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery upon the armpit, and indeed a cautery upon each side, and two small cauteries upon the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery upon the armpit, and indeed a cautery upon each side, and two small cauteries upon the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
When the hemorrhoids are deep-seated, or one or more, and are old and are composed of thick cold and moist humors, they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it is of no use to do cauteries III upon the spine of the back, this which is all behind the shoulders, almecdate and in triangulating, and I cauterize behind the shoulder II two;
III if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and you see swelling in the face, then you must make a great cautery upon the stomach, as it is said before, and another upon the liver, and another upon the spleen throughout the cautery staple. And leave the cautery open long enough tight After treatment, when he is healed.
When you grasp the limb, if you see the cautery which seems to raise it, then immediately put it all ablaze upon that limb grasped and leave as much of your hand as the cautery comes up to the birth of the vein, without restraint.
Fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il y a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit. Do it once or twice, and if there is much pus, cauterize each one as we have said; after the wound treatment is useful until they are healed.
and if you cauterize with a large burn on the flesh, it will have more great help.
When the patient cannot tolerate the size or opening of the wound, as we have told you, if there is any other ailment which cannot be healed except by cautery.
When no fistula comes, and it is swollen and emits putrid and moist corrupted matters, if the doctor has done all he can with a slight attempt, and keeps that he will drain until he has drained as much as he can.</start_of_turn>
After flushing out the cautery which seems to raise it, and holding it in the fistula as much as it tries to enter, repeat the cautery until the burn becomes rigid and corrupted; once, or twice, or three times, as much as the amount of matter requires
and be careful not to burn the nerves that are close by, and the large veins.
If the fistula goes up to the body of the bladder and the intestines, if you are aware of these things, do not make this fire burn except in charcoal, and think that it is not a living thing.
After treatment, when the limb is healthy, and if the swelling has gone down, and the matter is hardened and long stretched, then know that the limb is completely healed
and if the matter is not hardened, know that the limb is rotten, and the bone is corrupted by it and thus with one of these things that we shall say about the limb.
When there is pain of cold coming from afar, and great swelling, and do not take any medicine, then it is known that you must burn over the cold from one side and from the other with the navel cautery that we have mentioned before
And if we cauterize in the middle, if there are three cauteries in a row, it will be more helpful.
De la vessie. When the bladder is swollen and weak of fruit and moisture, if the patient retains the urine, then make the cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, and I have directed that you make two incisions, one to the right and one to the left, and make three cauteries as long as one would hold in a dish.</start_of_turn>
And make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them.</start_of_turn
And let the cauteries be circular as mentioned before.</start_of_turn>
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not let me rest, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are late.</start_of_turn And when they come, if they cause great pain. then you must make three incisions around the joint, as we have said or the cautery of the bladder, and two incisions on the back;
or the cautery of the navel as we have said.</start_of_turn>
When viscous moisture descends into the armpit of the shoulder, and because of this it moves out of place, the sign is that the armpit is longer than the other when measured together.</start_of_turn
and it is found that the limb hangs downwards, if you must therefore cauterize the patient on the armpit with one cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the limb around the armpit as it turns, so that the armpit is within the circle.</start_of_turn
And if the burnings are like those which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these burnings do not appear, make three burnings of the olive oil, and let the burnings be as strong as all the others.
And keep the wound clean until it has healed.
And if these cautery treatments are not present, make two cauteries of the olive tree, and let the cautery be as strong as all the others; and cure until it is healed. When pain comes to the groin, from cold and moisture, the patient is cured of what we have said in the division; the cure is not worth it, and the disease is ancient Therefore it is necessary that you purge the patient of the bad humors by means of foul or bony pills After that make a burn;
And the method of the fire cautery is as follows: And the method of the fire cautery is as follows: it is known to join medicines with fire cautery.
The fire cautery is performed in two ways, as follows: one of them is...
...that you cauterize on the hip bone three triangular cauteries as follows, and make good depth and great, and put between each cautery a thickness equal to the diameter of an olive seed, and either olive oil cautery...
...whenever you cauterize in the middle of the shoulder, because there are three of them as follows:
And if you see that the cautery is done on the circular mark that we mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder...
But make part as well that the circle encompasses the whole thigh, and that all the space around the knee is as it should be.
And this is the method which is done in sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, if the patient says that the pain persists, and three cauteries below the ankle are done, one on the left side twice;
Or be the cautery fine, or be the space around the knee be wide open
And if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two knuckles or close to that, if you burn there where the pain is three points or three times at the burn which is called "points". And if the master directs, if you must do more.
If he feels that the pain extends from the knee to the thigh, let him undergo cautery with the blunt or circular cautery instrument; and keep him well guarded in all your cauteries, so that you do not leave the cautery on too long, nor burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you cause him no greater pain and contraction.
I myself have seen many who have cauterized on the ankle over the foot, and left them until the leg was completely limp, and the bone was fractured, and corrupted throughout the bone. After a solution of the belly from which death results.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in each one, according to this manner.
And he should say in the cautery of the thigh, since this is the manner, do it like this and hold his hand as thick as a fist, or less, and do it with nails or with the nails and nails of the other side until you have made space the quantity of a nut of peas.</start_of_turn>
And let the nails be over two parts, and be like nails, and there should be one inch of burn well made.</start_of_turn
And thus is the form:
And thus is the form: let the hair grow long and even until it is all red and soft, and then put it on the basin of the ailing limb, and keep it still on the wound side.
and once the fire cautery is done, leave it for three days then make an ointment of lint, and leave the wound open long and tense after the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
Albucasim says that our doctors often use this cautery because of its promptness, and we see that those who use it are many
and indeed all those who are cauterized suffer from it, and they are tormented by it
The fire cautery if it be that you make an instrument with nails in it descends the margin of the door, and be of iron or of tin a foot long, and at the height there are two nails, and between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a thumb. and be open downwards and upwards, and join together in this form:
Then put on the basin of the shoulder to the patient lying on his side so that the skin cost the skin, and press your hand lightly on the basin of the shoulder; Then pour between the two circles of the arm warm which is scorched by the fire, and leave it for an hour with tension, and soothe the patient the heat and the burn of it.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And when the bites do not pass, hold your hand with the instrument and lift the hair with soft pressure, and leave it for three days, and put on grease until the black of the scab becomes osteitis. and leave for three days that pus comes out
and this would be the last help after the treatment of wounds as long as it is safe
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that will hold the limb as you did in the buttock previously
And this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written or treated about the rectification of medicine. Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot. or if there is a little loss of blood, that the point of a razor can enter there;
or if there is a little loss of blood, that the point of a razor can enter there; and put the container of that potion into another container, and put alkali and chalk and sweet oil upon it, until there is one dose below the powders that you can take with your hand easily
and leave it until it descends hot water and blood or pot is plumped, then take all this oil and spit it out on chalk and alkali as before
And in this way if there is moisture and it is administered in the midst of medical treatments and other cauteries of other members.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
And Galiens tells us of a cure for the pain of the hip and the sciatic vein, and he says that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at one time when they did this cure, and he bathed as he is taught afterwards.
And take in part a handful of fresh and dry barley, break it down with a little fat, and put on the hip, thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind.
And leave it for three hours, so that the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.</start_of_turn>
Then let him enter the bath or wash as long as his body is relaxed, and let him enter the water or lie down, and the pain will vanish and be healed.
And let no one use the fire cautery of such medicines, except after the evacuation of blood.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fine hair, if it helps with saliva.</start_of_turn>
It must be done cautiously.</start_of_turn Take lint and soak it in oil, and put it on the pit between the thumb and the great toe and the one that is called fossicle.</start_of_turn
After taking fine hair dry, grasp it with fire until it is charred, and put on wool, and leave it until it is stained.</start_of_turn
And do it again, and do not stop doing it until you think by sense that it is coming until the hip, and that the pain is gone.</start_of_turn
And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the limb.
of backache.</start_of_turn>
When pain comes from the back, or from sitting or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar things of cold expanding matter, none of these signs are worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
And it is to be known that when the patient is free from foul pus or other things, that we make this upon the back, loin or where the pain is found, three lines signed with a needle, and in each line five cauteries or more as is necessary for the virtue and the quantity that the patient can endure.
And let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "points".
And if you see, make three cauteries or four at the middle cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes as a small wound, and the sign of its beginning is that it has burst open when it happens, and fear And you find in the back bone of the shoulder and in us the appearance that comes after the other spines.
When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize at the cautery of this circle in this fashion. If the fire cautery burns some part of the spine, it increases.
And if you see that the burn penetrates the spine as much as two or three lines, and that the points are close to each other.
After treating the wound as much as necessary, and when it is healed as we have said, keep the cautery away from the bone which is close to a nerve
of the pain of the joints
When joint pain arises from moisture that has spread throughout the limb and the pain comes in lumps, that they call "podagre" properly; and when the cause is cold and the disease is cured by medicine, it cannot be cured; but if it is cured by cautery in part manner.
makes the mouth of the cautery enter the joint of the bone, and either the olive cautery is to be taken in this fashion:
And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the bone, do not make the burn with the whole cautery; rather mark it with the word "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you make the cautery on each knee three cautery or four of each side, with the whole olive cautery;
If you must do more, if you make more of it, but do not hold your hand firmly until the expected hour has passed.
And if the pains descend down to the groin and the back, administer the cautery as we have said in this chapter.
If the pains are at the fingertips, if you make holes two lines deep in the flesh;
And if there remains no pain in that place, if you make holes above the joint and on the nail of the hand;
And if the pains come up to the hips or to the shoulders, if you cauterize some part, and make the patient bear well and prescribe medicine.
For if you make him drink and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the help of God.
When the pulse comes in anger, and the bowels descend like stones, it is new, if you can believe it, that when you see the cure, it does not make him vomit that matter. and that he uses things that let go of the belly, so that the pains descend from his belly
after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm tight until the bowels are repaired, and keep them close to you, and sign the pulse above the collarbone, and at all signs that there is like half of a circle below the ribs
Then withdraw the fire cautery; thus is the form:
As long as he is limp and groans senselessly. Then withdraw the fire cautery; thus is the form: withdraw the hair at its root. and hold the eyes steady so they do not move back;
and well cover the wounds of the patient, and put some lint and a bandage on the wounds, and another on his hand that holds the eyes;
then put the cautery on the sign at the whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, if you do it again as many times as you live until you reach the bone; and be careful that the hair does not slip when you are doing the cautery. Do not burn it; Do not burn it; and let the patient not suffer further harm.
And soaks that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is in vain.
And you must know that the cautery of the veins must be subtle according to the measure of the small ones, and of the great people also in their measure
After three days, cure the limb of the burn as long as the scab has become ossified.
After curing other ailments, keep the patient lying down for forty days on his back until the wound is well healed
And you must know that his movements must be gentle and long, so that the fluid does not come out when he moves to go to bed
And after forty days, when he wants to rise, there appears a well-made mark, and he bears it for forty days more.
and has had good rest, that he works little and avoids eating too much drink and meat, and excessive laughter.
and when he has done this teaching, he is entirely healed.</start_of_turn>
And I shall speak of the cure of the tail in its chapter.
When wounds come in other parts and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, then you make the fire cautery again according to their quantity, and take away a third of the burn.</start_of_turn after the cure according to what we have said.</start_of_turn
and none of the former have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this shape.</start_of_turn>
but first sign the limb well and make a line along the width of the wound, and another at the bottom, and hold your hand firmly with all your might on the burn cautery clamp
But the first burnings are lighter and milder.
than the old ones in any limb. When pain comes to any limb, or to the hip or to the wound, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medical cure is not worth it, then it is advisable to burn it with the cautery which is called “points,” and to burn it according to the length of the limb and the width and its weakness and its toughness and its twists and its pain.
If he is sane at the first cautery, that is well;
If so, commence another cautery on that one, because it is customary that it must move to the neighboring limb, so that you can make the cauteries until the patient is sane.</start_of_turn>
The disease never helps itself with a cautery, and even the sickness that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you see the cautery being performed? Take guard if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not linger or stay, for you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole illness, so you make five cauteries on the head.</start_of_turn I make the head new, and the other towards the front at the end of the beard.</start_of_turn And on the two horns, and one behind the heel.
And I leave the hand as long as the cautery comes up to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out forcefully so that the vapors of the humors can escape.
And I cauterize on the mouse according to what is before me
And if the moisture is scattered everywhere; and I cauterize thus in the manner we have said or in chief, and I cauterize on the nape of the neck, and two on the shoulder blades, and one on the armpit and one on the elbow and two on the two hips And II on the flanks, and II on the strings of the teeth, and I on the knuckles of the hands and feet, and on the sockets of the hands.
And beware of the nerves that are under the calcaneus bone, do not burn them.
Never perform cautery on the os pisiform, or on the os of the stomach, or on the liver.
And as many times as you make cautery, the more you will help, and the more benefit you will do.
And the patients do not feel pain from the cautery if they already feel it, because the flesh is already corrupted
And you must know that the burn should be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will do in handling various objects.
After treating the wound with flour from time to time with honey and other cures until it is healed
When swelling comes to any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not serious, then you must perform cautery on the limb according to the greatness and smallness of the limb;
And let the cautery be applied in the middle of the wound, as thick as the current. Then hold the edges of the wound steady until it has healed completely.
And never do we burn with the cautery on the hand, arm, or back, at the exit of nerves that cause the limb to move, and if so it swells the bone
and do not put anything in the way that hinders the movement of bones and nerves
When the ailment called "albaras" is inflamed, and no medicine will help, then burn with a cautery a little in the middle, according to the thickness of the wound, until the blood is ossified and has changed colour;
Then the cure of wheat sometimes and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alder, one part of each. Then mix them all together, or bind them with a bandage, and keep it warm until it is healed
The cure for fistula by cautery
When a boil comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, if you burn it with the cautery that seems like a circle, all around the boil.</start_of_turn>
And all these things say that the burn is made in the middle of the abscess.
And I do not think that this is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen many times;
And the right thing is to cauterize thoroughly, with the burn that is called the circle, as we have said before
When anyone has an ailment called "adubelati", and it delays in healing or through the excess it causes or because of the severity of the disease when it is decrepit (that is, too great), and there is much blood, or by the tension; and you see it haste to heal. then you should make cautery around the mouth of the wound with little cauteries in pricking; and leave it like that. For it will haste to heal.
And if you see it turning pale with all the cautery, if the burn is large:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have perceived the cold, and be such cauteries as the patient feels the pain depart in part as the process of putrefaction is accelerated.
Afterwards, cure as long as he is perfectly healthy.
Another symptom of disease is called "corrodens," which is nothing other than the swelling of a limb, because it softens the bones like dry leather.
If you see this ailment in which it is possible to suffer from cautery together with fire, then withdraw the large and small cauteries slowly and gently, as it is convenient for the limb or for the disease itself
then cauterize all the parts until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing remains except the bone itself
And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs, and cover them with oil until the blisters from the fire are ossified, and all the corruption.</start_of_turn
After the cure of external medicines that cause carbuncles.</start_of_turn>
And if you see after three days that the hair has not grown, that is well;
And if this does not happen, if you repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted from the corrupt flesh.</start_of_turn>
And this matter is never cured by medicine except by fire cautery.</start_of_turn
but indeed fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of medicine by water in the division.</start_of_turn> take as much as you need.</start_of_turn
from pores that come as pieces Often there arises a disease from the swelling of the feet, which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a great burdensome thing that swells the feet
And the cautery of this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery
Fire cautery, if you are sparing one, do as with a pin of wool, and make it of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the hair of all parts, and that there be slight margins;
After he puts everything on high above the cloud, and turns his hand all around the cloud as much as it comes to the front of the cloud; and let him stay there for three days until it begins to putrefy. Then make him a poultice of bruised elderberries crushed with wool, and leave the poultice on all night, and bind his wound tightly and it will be extracted from its root.
If thou art scorched by fire, I order thee to cauterise as doth a needle of wool. Make it of good iron of the measure that it may penetrate the heel of all parts, and leave subtle margins. Then put all about the heel, and lay thy hand round the heel until it comes to the front of the heel; and leave it there for three days until it begins to yield. Then make an embolus of wild mallow bruised with gel, and leave the embolus upon all night, and bind it firmly and it shall be plucked from its root.
And if they are converted by boils, and often happen in hands and feet, if you must, bring a hot cautery there it is in part like this: take a needle of spiderwort or iron, or a piece of guttawel, and put on the cloud and the thread, which is to say little wrinkles; And put the bandage upon so that it encompasses all around, then put a little ball of wool warm, and hold your hand well, and press your hand backwards so that the margin of the bandage comes to the root of the nail, and you will find the warm water deep until the root.
And offer the patient a little the biting of the warm water for an hour. Then leave it like that, and it will discharge all its roots
So do another like that, until you have plucked out all that is at the source, and cure the sores that cause pain.
When there are tremors of cold from nerves, or of quartan fever or of another kind, if you must, do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between the shoulder blades and one on the hip or on the stomach at the olive cautery
If you let him tremble, and he will hasten the healing of the cold disease.
Never do wounds appear by chance, or boils filled with pus, which come from corrupted matters.
When you first notice that we are performing cautery on each head of the pustule: A subtle charcoal cautery of mustard seed, or that its point should be grasped by the fire, or of long aristoloke root, or the lenticular cautery
And never at the beginning when they begin, according to this manner, do they pierce forward, but are broken by the excess from which they come, and are healed;
but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the surgeon, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; It is a great shame thing to prolong.
And whenever this happens without any [apparent] cause, if you hastily put your thumb on the wound of the vein, and hold it too tightly without calming the pain, no blood will issue any longer;
Then apply the olive cautery to the wound several times, making them small and large until they are all red;
Then I take hold of it, great or small according to the wound and the position of the limb where the artery is straight, and put the cautery on that vein or hold your thumb there, and hold the cautery as long as it is not fixed
And if it spurts out when you take your thumb away from the vein, and the cautery is finished, take hold urgently of another cautery that is on the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding stops
And beware that you do not tear away the nerve that is below, and that no other harm comes upon the patient.
And keep that when the artery is large, without bursting, we cannot well fill it again without closing it in three ways which we have mentioned before. Or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligation with thread, or by medicines placed above which have the power to stop bleeding; And let it be bound and strained afterwards.
Who will bring about a lasting restoration of the limb except by the strict draping of cloths or the application of hot things upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit thereby in some way.
And if this happens to him at no time and there is no remedy or medicine present, if he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold it firmly until it is healed above the wound and above the vein; And do not move it [the shoulder], but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes cold as ice until it becomes frozen and swells and rests.
And make inquiry beforehand concerning that on which you must perform cautery and medicines.
We have already said in the first chapter that every ailment for which cautery of fire or burning medicine is recommended, we must know the odiums, causes, instruments and forms of the cautery.
and I put this chapter of the head down to the foot, and I will speak of this chapter in the same way as forasmuch as we find it more conveniently in this way
And thus, as I begin this chapter, it is necessary to say, my dear friend, that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in all the previous cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater caution
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die Where there is doubt and fear, and comes the death of many.
And I advise you not to be rash For in various ways people come to cures. When there is such fear, which comes with their ailment, that they move carelessly because of the suffering of their ailment, and from the greatness of their malice; And for this reason we must have fear.
And for this reason there is sense in it, and it says: Wait, I am ready;». and the ailment is grievous.
You must only trust those who come to your aid who have this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not be reckless but thoughtfully of what you are certain, and what you can have taken and lost;
And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is either preserved or transformed.
and this will help you to achieve lasting fame, glory, and lasting memory.
Very dear son, our Sirs, you must take good understanding and diligence, and if you yearn to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cautery, that I have devised from the head to the toes, because you will find it more readily what you have to master.
The diseases which often accompany childbirth cause the head of the child to swell excessively; and when the swelling is too great, the head of the child is strained too much
and never is this caused by any other reason than that it has not been treated
I have never seen this disease except in childbirth, and with all those who have given birth; therefore I believe that it is better for me to omit some parts of the work in order to heal the disease.
And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with fluid, and the head was growing so large that he could not bear it.
and the moisture was so great that it became blood, and this blood if it is gathered together under the bone on the hump, between the bone and the marrow
when the moisture is between the bone and the marrow, and the abscess is small, you must make a wide incision at the head of the bone
and as long as the moisture remains corrected
and when the limb is restored to its normal position:
If the moisture is deeper and the incision is larger, if you make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the sutures of the head split over a wide area, and there is pain when you press your hand into it, and this does not return If it seems that you have made three incisions here in this manner:
And after the incision, drain out all the moisture forcefully. If it seems that you have made three incisions here in this manner: after that restrain the incisions of cloth and powder, and put wine and oil, and leave in place for five days.
Then take out the dressing, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and leave the head of the shoulder tightly bound, and give the patient dry meat from the same amount of moisture as before the limb is comfortable and healed
And another method of incision is that you look or open the size of the abscess, and collect the fluid.
For it never comes to that; Never before; never behind Never in distress; Never in distress; and never in weakness.
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
and beware that you do not cover the artery; and the vein will bleed blood, so that the patient dies from excessive bleeding and the evacuation of moisture
When there is no known disease which is called "catarrh," and there is pus or a wound, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the only cure is to cauterize with this that you cover the arteries.
You must therefore keep it covered, so that you do not see it covered, that the patient makes his head move back; after you have wiped the limb with a rough cloth so that the arteries open, then stretch the patient’s neck with all your might Then look if the vein bursts, and the blood from one and the other side is behind the ears, and then they are replaced.
Then mark the blood vessels, then grasp one and the other with a sharp clamp of two parts, as long as the vein reaches the bone, and that is from the large end of the head
If you see, hold the sponge below the artery and grasp above, cutting as much as two fingers deep.</start_of_turn>
When the vein is cut, if blood spurts continuously, keep pressure on it without interruption.</start_of_turn>
And if the artery does not open by feeling, if you must measure the amount of space of three fingers, then mark it and do so until the bone;
And that which must be put away if there is blood, if it is six fingers, and by chance more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the refilling of the artery.
Then look at the wound: Then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point where the abscess has burst, if the wound edges are raw and do not bleed, then strain the wound and ligate it, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
If the artery does not open on inspection, if you suspect it is obstructed by a foreign body, measure the distance of two finger-widths, then mark the spot and proceed until you reach bone.  If there is blood loss of more than a quarter, and sometimes less or more, according to what the patient can tolerate and the refilling of the artery, then look at the wound: if it remains over the point where the artery was opened, if the surrounding tissue does not swell, then strain the wound and bind it, and treat the wound with oil until it is healed. When ancient weeping comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and the phlegm in the temples and the ancient saliva weaken and similar things, it is cured by means of medical treatments and all that does not benefit it, if we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And the method of extracting them is that if the patient frequently bites his temples, understand the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is much more easily closed than in other men who are too cold;
and if it is closed, strain the patient’s neck with some bandages, then rub the limb of no rough hair, and rise the limb of warm water until the artery appears open again Then take the sponge which is like this: Then take the sponge which is like this. Lightly scratch the skin until you reach the artery, then lift it up and take hold of the veins above the wound; remove the cloths that are underneath that part of the chest.
And if the artery is thin, if the clot is at the tip of the bone, then cut that part according to the quantity of blood that comes out For if it is not securely held, if it does not leap without doubt in all things.
And take out blood six cubic centimeters, just until three
And if the artery is great, if you can, tie it up with two threads of strong silk, so that no blood flows in front of the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow out naturally
Then grasp the surplus that is between the two lines in that hour, and if you see it, if you cauterize with a blunt cautery until the head is cut off, the bone will be severed.
And this is the painful thing, if the patient has no fever and is of a fair complexion. For the cautery is useful for finishing off the moisture: because it is more useful for moisture.
Or it is useful for extracting arteries that are filled with much cotton and put on tension well made
and when they are loosened, if they are cured with dry medicines that cause the growth of hair, and tension, as long as they are sane
And if without a clamp of the artery as much as you know how to do, if you are in a hurry to cover with cautery, or if you use the hand of vitriol and strain it in your hand that it is not stained; If you have none of these things present, if you must take out the limb for as long as it remains cold, and rise the limb with cold water as long as it does not stop, and strain it as much as it seems necessary.
And must have between the two cuts one must have a great space, and then when you have seen the two bones, and you put the hand of the burning iron over as much as it comes up to the bone, and grasp the vein with two fingers; And let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not enough soured from this burn throughout.
This is the form of the burn:
And what is more languid and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting through two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced in order to keep it longer warm. For when the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
The fire must have between the joints of the handle a space of one inch; then when you have signed with the needle the bones, and you must let the loop of the burn be burning over until it comes up to the bone, and close the vein in one inch of bones; and let them be separated between the bones because it is not well soldered by this cautery in any way; and this is the form of the cautery: tears. When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are above the root of the arm, and it does not profit from any medical cure that we do, and you see the face of the patient twisted, and feels his front limp as from drunkenness; And if they are tense and moist so that the hairs of paper stick, and are pulled out, and scorched by the tears, if there is any hope of this cure And they call it the old "contusion", and that you make at the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has or front, and then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the front
And they call it the old "contusion", and that you make at the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has or front, and then make three incisions or front equally according to the length of the front And either one of the incisions must be made just below the two front teeth, swallowing down swallowing juice until it reaches the nape of the neck; or the other two must be made alongside the ribs, and keep the incision of the arteries that are alongside the ribs.
And hold your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and if there is a wound there, estimate the quantity of three thumbs in the thickness of the joint.
And provide a piece of sponge and wipe the blood with a cloth, then hold the needle sharp with two fingers, which is its shape:
of the incision which is from the temple to the second incision And draw out all the marrow that is between the two incisions to the entire surface of the bone, then make the other half of the incision from the other second, and then pull out this needle. If on the first incision the instrument which is called the "cultellaire", which is very well chiselled on one side and soft on the other, does not penetrate, it is like this:
And place the knife at the areolar cartilage towards the chest at the shoulder, and the knife below the bone, and hold it tight until it reaches the midpoint of the fracture.
And keep all the blood vessels that descend from the head as closed as the incision remains continuous until that which opens from the root, and then the other half is done in the middle fissure until the other side is reached.
And then drain the blood equally, and express the limb for the blood taken
then place in the wound a little bundle of cotton, and put over it soaked cloths in wine and oil and balsam, and keep that the incisions do not bleed
and after three days let the limb rest, and bring great pain relief with cold water, then treat the wound with basic ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds in general until it is healed.
When there is no acute cautery, the eyes remain tense and small, the pupil dilates, and the papers burn; the hair roots ache, and when the head is pricked at the root, there is great pain, and the patient groans; therefore it is necessary to cauterize many times for these matters and for the cautery itself does not suffice without them.
And commandest the patient to return his face, then make a great wound on the middle of the forehead, and another large one at the eyebrow. From the left temple to the right temple, and from the incision up to the bone; keep your hands away from the temples that move downwards
and when the bone is exposed, if there is blood, soak it up with a sponge, and then drain between the two layers of the incision and put in cotton wool, and try to hold it in place Then lay beneath drapes soaked in wine and oil, and keep your wound closed with a bandage.
When it is fractured, if you must, rub the bone until it begins to heal, and then treat with drying things, which cause it to harden.
Part in manner. Take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice of it and apply it to these wounds to harden them throughout
From the swelling of the ears
All that you hear in the ear is one of the three things: or barley, or barley husk, or stone, or similar things like iron Or semen, if as desired, fever, peas; Or semen, if as desired, fever, peas;
When it hurts in the ear lobe or any other way that does not fit with the ear, do not raise it up in the ear, but put the ear down on the sole of the foot
If you see the stone, if no trace of violet oil or saffron oil is seen, then immediately order extraction. And make him cough forcefully, and hold his nose when he coughs, and put around his ears pieces of cloth or wool.</start_of_turn> Hold his ears downwards.</start_of_turn>
Many times comes forth from this cure.</start_of_turn
If it does not come forth, order extraction as fine as possible, for this is the form.</start_of_turn
If it comes forth with fine pins, that is good.</start_of_turn
If not, order extraction with the tip of a needle of small double curvature.</start_of_turn
If it does not jump by this, make an incision like that of an spider and hold the head of the incision or tear the ear well; stamp that which is around the incision so that it will not go in with the incision. Then the thread will come out, for often it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out whole, take hold of the skin with your fingers, put on no instrument that is pointed for that purpose, and put a pad of cotton around it then press the flesh against the bone or whatever it is, and the thread will come out
And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, if you hasten to cut the ear away as well as to open the vein, and spasm;
And if you must make an incision first of all, you must have the patient sit upright and place their ear to their chest; make a small incision at the root of the ear, at the fatty or glandular tissue beneath. Or make the incision like a half-moon, as long as you reach the bone, then the bone according to your need, and draw out the blood profusely from your mouth.
And the cure when it is bleeding steadily
And if there are grains of sand which are enclosed and swell, administer extraction;
And if it cannot be extracted, if you must, administer a sponge soaked in vinegar in this form: and order incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have done it many times.
then the extraction will have subtle marks and will be sweet, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.</start_of_turn>
When the ear aches, it is certain that the patient uses a condiment at the outset, and fills the ear with much cotton. Or perhaps on the same ear the pain is gone already.</start_of_turn> If the ear is suddenly relieved for this reason, it is good.</start_of_turn
if this does not occur, take many stones according to the length of your wish and hold them tight and loosely, and burn them until they are black.</start_of_turn and put the patient one or both of his ears out, and pull over his piece from the other side, and pierce with another stone on the ear that is in the ear.</start_of_turn and do not stop doing this piercing with stones until the pain is completely gone, and when it has gone away.</start_of_turn
If you see it, if you take hold of one of the joints and grasp the other with fire as long as the latter remains dull,
then make the rest of the limb as long as the pain has gone away, as we said concerning the stone.</start_of_turn>
In the extraction of the bone, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar things, cure it as we said in the cutting.</start_of_turn>
but if it is of great size, we must feel its extraction of nails.</start_of_turn and this is the easier thing to do in the ear.</start_of_turn>
In the extraction of worms from the ear, when you have cured as we said in the cutting or in treating distillations, and the cure has not benefited, if you look at the ear in the sun:</start_of_turn If there is no opening visible, if the veins have small pinpricks, and if there is no opening, take hold of the limb as it is: this is the form.
And let the incision be broad and deep. And hold the limb further from the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then follow with all the force; do this until you see it come out entirely.
and if it does not come out, grasp firmly at the cotton sleeve as I have said concerning the stone;
and if it does not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the former have proved in the incision of veins, and you will find them or treat with distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, if you see it like this: And if you see silver or lead drops falling from the petty holes, and over the top to distill;
And press firmly during the distillation with the well-made lead instrument, so that if you see taking a scraper and covering around the point immediately with cotton; then pour it pour the oil or juice that you see of your medicines into the cannel, and the cannel is in the ear;
then hold the scraper against all the cotton, and press your hand steadily until the oil is distilled or almost all the ear is dry; And thus he feels the disease within, and let the distillations go out from the ear as soon as they are boiled; And keep them from being too cold, for the medicine will not be so good.</start_of_turn>
From the swelling of the ears
No child is born without a hole in their ear.</start_of_turn
And the same thing happens at home with the bursting of a wound, or of a hair growing in the ear, and these bursts never come without leaving a mark in the ear if they are not seen.</start_of_turn
And never is there any loss of the hole, and you see it well.</start_of_turn
That which comes from the wound if it is not seen, is grief of healing in many situations, and in this it is seen that you put the diseased ear in the sunlight.</start_of_turn Look well: Look well: if you see the skin split open, if the work has all this spittle around it, then this is the form.
And be quick and resolute in front and behind all around, if it does not burst the ear
If the split is of cartilage or bone of the ear, if you hold the ear gently, as long as the cartilage is whole
And if the boils are inflamed in the ear, take a fine scraper and burnish with a little fire, then put out or bind the ear.
If you feel the split from which the patient groans at the ear, pierce gently, and hold that you do not tear the nerves of the ear
Then put in the ear a bandage according to the size of the wound, and mix in the unguent Egyptian. Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet.
Do nothing for the moment until the wound is healed; or if you attempt to do so and the fluid escapes from the ear, it is clear that you have failed. Try again with another attempt, applying an ointment of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling has subsided. Then cure it when it is healed.
If blood comes from the wound, plunge a sponge and cover it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which will stop the bleeding of the blood that comes from the wound such as distillations.
This is what happens with pus when it comes out wet and dry: if you stretch it out with pincers and nails, and grasp it with the tip of a spatula from its root then put out the broken glass with the ointment
And if the burn is not superficial, if the fire cautery is applied after the incision is worth doing;
then many times it returns, nothing can stay rooted from its root. and when they are burned by fire, their roots are scorched and do not return.</start_of_turn>
De la gresle. Many times come out of paper the humors of things that seem to be greasy in their form and in their hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "granulin" and is an accumulation of large moisture in the marrow above and below.</start_of_turn it is like this:
it is like this: take care that the granulin does not move from one side to the other, and that is a light matter to know;
Leave the hair long and even, then singe the lower part lightly, then take hold as pincers and grasp.
If you do not hold it firmly, it will pierce the patient’s eye; if you do not grieve this to the patient, be silent.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is large, if you assemble with a bandage, and cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if it is small, do not use force, for it will swell up again and cause harm.</start_of_turn>
And if the shoulder joint is dislocated downwards towards the ear, if you turn the eye downwards, seize the shoulder with two pincers, and press from one side and the other.</start_of_turn
And if the bone is displaced by the incision, it matters not;
And when the marrow is cut, if you let the dirty oil of the wound leak out, it will heal the limb of that which is harmful as long as the patient is well.</start_of_turn>
from the fat of the hairs Pus is an ointment that is made from rags of papers soaked in oil, and this causes more pain to no one, and causes the eyes to water, and comes the tearing out of the morning, and they cannot see the sunlight because the tears hurry out of their eyes.</start_of_turn
And for this reason they sleep with their faces towards the ground, and sleep on their backs, and their papery rags are wet with moisture that inflates and appears to cover them with pus from the ointment.</start_of_turn And when you press the limb towards your chest and feel the exinach between them.
And thus the patient should place his head in his armpit.
Then take a bandage of linen, and make a loop in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the excess of flesh from the chest part, and put it on him and press from both sides, so that the excess is gathered in the circle
then make in the middle of the moisture a wound as wide as a vein, and do not make it any larger than the wound made to the blood vessel
and tighten the skin as much as you see to the excess and in many cases the excess comes out of the wound, according to the shape of a white fat piece.
Remove the thumb entirely from the thick flesh between your thumbs, and bend your hand towards the right and left as much as possible;
and keep that you do not tear the membrane, that you do not move the palm all the way to the edge, that you do not bleed.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not come out at the beginning of the incision, if you see a little piece of flesh, widen the incision slightly so that it comes out.</start_of_turn>
Then take it out as we have said, then moisten with gauze and water, and put on the limb, and strain gently.</start_of_turn
And if there are such homes that break wind and put on top to corrupt this moisture that remains immobile.
Then treat it as long as it is sane
And if it comes to opening an abscess, the cure of packing absorbs as much as it is possible while it is healthy.
hair of papers</start_of_turn> When paper nails grow long, do not cut them except as nature dictates, and when they are inflamed, if they irritate the eyes, they cause tears, and generate various diseases as tears are accustomed to and soften paper and mucus, as long as this is the cause of the irritation of the eyes.</start_of_turn
And it is the cure in three ways: Or by complete fire cautery, or by water-based medicine as it is before or alongside the fire cautery, and it is made by incision and suture or by sutures, as I shall say.
You must put the patient’s head in your right hand, and take the oil from your left hand;
If it is softened, that is good; if not, if there is a splinter in all its fibers; and let the hair grow at the margin of the wound or the hair grows from these hairs, and pull out the hair at its root and rejoin it at the tip
Then make in the lower part of the limb the papere, the hairs at the junction, throughout the whole circumference, from the great toe to the little one.
Then pull out the thread and put on the papere a little loop of cotton and bandage, then mark on the papere a sign like a berry of mistletoe, and behold that the sign be in proportion to the quantity that you see elevate the papere that is destined for you
And if there is part which has mixed with it a great quantity of the papere according to what the papere is softened;
Then make throughout the whole circumference on the two lines that you have marked, from the great toe to the little one And let there be one of the incisions close to the hair roots in the thickness of a root, then hold the ointment in one of the two angles downward, and then burn it all.
Then join the two layers with a suture of silk thread, and wipe the blood, and dry the excess thread from the two edges at all their joints, as you see me do;
If this does not suffice, if there is no improvement, then leave the suture and the thread for three days or four;
Then treat the wound with dry and constricting things, because the pus comes out at the bottom of the wound and joins together, but the suture is useless (as they say the old men), and this is work without fear. And if in another way:
And if in another way: And if in another way: if you mark the mark of a figure which is like the fuelle of a myrtle, as we have said, at three inches deviate according to the shape which is like this.
Then hold that which is above down with equal force according to the form which is mentioned above
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not right, take a needle or there is one thread, and pass it through the mark; and pass another thread tightly at the great loop, and the second thread tightly at the little one, and join between your two the two threads evenly.
then keep your hand even, and keep all the skin over which you have marked, as we have said, then join the two layers of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is healed
If the incision comes to an abscess, if it pleases of some cerote and some remaining oozing that soothe.
And never happens that the hair of the beard is converted:
If you must use what we have said of the incision.
But the costure in one and in the other is more artificial
The treatment of boils is in this form: and that you convert the hair and the skin around it as I have said, and then make two incisions by art, and two fine threads as long as the hair and as large as a hazelnut is; and hold as two cuts of two parts or you hold the threads;
Then assemble the one and the other together smoothly over that which rests on the marrow of the oil, and strain the two thumbs of the two parts forming. and leave them together for a while, and the skin which is strained will be toughened, wrinkled, and swollen, until it becomes loose by itself.
If it is late, if the fire has a force, then cure it until it is sound
and when the wound is closed and the marrow is raised, and no more hair will grow there
and this is the form of the two thumbs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the work is like taking a subtle needle and there is one thread of silk subtle. Then assemble the bones and do not let one rest upon the other loosely, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm of the hand.
Then order in the chase one thread loosely of silk briefly, and do not tighten the thread too much.
Then place the patient's head in its normal position
and let the sunlight be removed so that the work is less burdensome, for this is a subtle and small work, then hold the needle at all times in the root of the hair and make it pierce the skin until you reach the natural hair line
then withdraw the hair until it is above the chase, and hold in the chase that hair, if there is one or two or three or more
Then stretch out your hand as far as the hairs of your beard grow freely over your face with their natural growth.
And if the chase is finished and the hairs do not prick with the touch of the hand, if you wish to keep the chase at a distance as you have commanded, as long as the hair vein pricks downwards until it disappears under the palm of the hand, you shall know by the sight of the oil.
Therefore if you wish to keep the chase and the distance, shut your eyes and leave them shut for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the beard appears once more;
And if the hair is thin, accompany it with long nails of a natural shape, and remove it with that or leave it as long as it is elongated and then rest it.
from the corruption of the oil When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the surface, if there are two methods:
When this ailment which is called "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the surface, if there are two methods: one natural, and the other unnatural.
And there may be from a wound, or a cut or burn, and from similar things.
And the way of working in this is that you make that suture, dry the flesh of it, put in some linen threads, and keep it until it is healed.
and do not use anything but dry and restrictive things in the treatment of it. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but give it emollient things, such as fennel; The hair of the acute or tall nettle and flaxseed be boiled, and aquilon oil melted in none of the oils, and it covers a bandage, and cures it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you must take care that it does not harden too much like before;
These things that we have said do not apply to other ailments except for this one, for it does not return like before.
This disease which is called "axacrati" in truth is natural and sudden.
The causes are wounds, fissures, cautery and similar things
And the way of the work in this matter is if you take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and the needle through the skin, and it makes split the skin so that the thread comes out two fingers from the skin
Then is the head of the shoulder above all awry, and the scapula has a wide space. If the limb returns to its natural position as it should, that is good.
If not, take hold of the limb and put it back into the socket, and twist the limb, and make two incisions or pierce through the flesh of the limb;
Make two incisions at two angles of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are reunited, the limb is as straight as a letter that has not been bent.</start_of_turn>
Then hold the limb firmly, according to the quantity of its bones and cartilages that are still inside, so that the dislocation is reset, and then join the two broken parts with a thread of linen.</start_of_turn>
Then the treatment for what we have said of the mild medicines and bandages, as long as they are sound.
And if the disease comes from a fracture or sprain or burn, if it is recommended that you make a full incision with the hair removed with paper, and as it has been said above. Then take two fingers of a bandage, as it has been said previously.
Then take two fingers of a bandage, as it has been said previously. And one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is diverse in form, and the learned men appear to be almost blind with all their wisdom concerning the return of the limb to its natural shape
and the patient himself, according to what is appropriate in the work and the instruments in many different situations.
When this inflammation occurs at home in a limb as the master of surgery has sutured with white oil, and cannot move or perform his natural works, if it is necessary, then you must bite the point of a scraper at the root of the limb and hold it high.
and extend as much as possible, as long as you can bear the pain that is in the sensitive area, which must not be too great and not too little, so that the patient does not suffer more from the sensitive area than from the oil;
and your incision, which you must carefully drain, lightly, so that the limb returns to its natural shape
and is cleansed thoroughly, and make no more use of the sharp oil of vinegar, but with sweet water and soft lye.
Then put between the paper and the oil a lint of linen, and put on the oil a few coarse wool rags in abundance. And afterwards apply a bandage of wool and other soft things as long as it is necessary.
The nails of the fingers are two ways: The first way is that it is nervous and looks like iron of a certain hardness, and another which is not nervous, but looks like white moisture frozen, which when touched with iron and warmed up again shows bites; if it does not die off immediately
and both appear to grow towards the great marrow, and cross to cross so that they cover the whole marrow and the whole brightness and movement of the oil
And if the patient places his head in his mouth, then he should hold the eyes. hold the eyes steady, and grasp the hair with the fingers of the hand that is not holding the instrument, and stretch it downwards. then take a needle, and put in hair of a horse, or of a sheep, or of a bull, and pass it firmly and double the point of the needle a little and fix it with the thread, and pierce through with the needle, and tie the thread at the base of the hair, and stretch the hair down, and pull out from the root of the hair all around the circumference of the hair, and leave the remaining part in the root of the beard or the hair, so that by the incision there does not appear the crust of tears usually;
And never has the nail stretched at the knuckle alone, but along with it, as we have said. Then the scorched area should be on the whole surface of the sponge so that this is the shape:
And keep that the sponge does not touch the thick cloth and breaks it, and that the burn does not penetrate;
and after the incision, pour the bleeding, pour the bleeding, pour the bleeding pour the bleeding pour the bleeding pour the bleeding throw in a little bit of bruised lint, and sprinkle with alum, and leave it until the next morning then the physician must cure what has been done so that it is healed
And if the nail is not nerveless, and you cannot push out the awl, and the needle cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured by medicines
And they grow as I have told you in the division, and if you see them covered, if you overpour the oil on the patient, take the spatula lighter rather than acute following this form. And pull the hair out gently, and if you see that it comes out easily and the root is pressed, if you distill from your mouth into the oil of colocynth make of litharge and red colocynth and it boils, and stamp the oil until it reaches the other ear;
If nothing hinders you, if like an abscess you have post-surgery, then milk should be withheld and first cure the abscess thoroughly until it has healed, and then resume the work as before, until it has healed.
Then repeat the work as I have said above, until it is completely healed.
And if at night in the oil there appears to be fat, suspend it to the bacon, and cut a part of it, rather than all at once, because of tears do not come;
Then distill in the red colander which is made of litharge.
There is never any red rose in the urine of healthy men; cover the navel and bind above the papers and turn towards the fire, and it appears like a rose of bulrush.
If the patient puts his head in his right mind, then the urine will smell of vinegar; and all that red stuff has a suitable stench for this, and the sensation is strong
Then crush the first red thing, and go on crushing until the end, and keep that you do not spill the oil at the work;
Or the incision of the spleen which we mentioned in the incision of the vein and has small forces so that one can break the bone easily, as this chapter shows in practice.
And when the incision is complete and the bone is exposed, if you use oil of rue or you distill collyrium rouge and similar corrosive medicines, put on cotton wool soaked in vinegar, so that it should adhere firmly to the wound.
If it does not stop bleeding and the wound is wide open, and you doubt that the wound has healed, if you leave the oil and treat the wound with soothing things that heal the wound
then return to your work when it is healed, and when the wound is complete, let the bones rest in the oil in this manner.
However, it is necessary to alleviate the cure of each weak oil from its natural way. and from the violent way, in the work of fire;
And do not strain your hand in any of these works until you see that the limb is suffering from the work.
The veins are red ones that are covered in oil, and they tolerate the gaze of the eye and disclose the oil throughout the days.
And so it is with the first that you see that the limb is relaxed, in which case it is forced, and there is no other disease fierce than relaxation; therefore take hold of it with part of your body:
instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then suspend the veins altogether according to his wisdom, and let them be loosely bound twice in this fashion:
and be doubled superficially by degrees in a circle according to this form:
then gently pull the veins out, and keep the blood from flowing for a while afterwards until you see the fierce veins removed from the root
and keep that you do not bleed at the points of the spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be vigilant in your work if you do not want to weaken only the veins
And when you have done this, if distilled in green and red oil of ravens, it will break up that which remains doubtful.
And if you do not wish to collect all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things that calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it until the pain is calmed and is secured after the swelling has gone down; then repeat in this manner until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And that is the form of forces:
Moisture which is called "arissati" is a fistula.</start_of_turn>
When you treat it with fire cautery and with strong water medicine as I have said before, and it does not heal, if it is deeply rooted in that which you have made on the swelling, then you must measure it there, and drain all the moisture from it, until the bone is exposed.</start_of_turn
And when the bone is discovered, you will see the corruption and blackness, if the wound has all the tools, for this is its form.
And is called "open wound", and is made with a sharp knife at the head of the bone, and is pointed as if with a file when it is in this form.
And put on the bone's corrupted flesh, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a lot until you feel that the corruption is gone;
Do this only once, and then restore the limb of drying medicines.
If the limb is swollen and puffy, and the bone is fractured, and the skin of the limb is swollen, and remains so for forty days, and does not heal and is not sutured, and accidents happen to it, know that it is healed;
If not, if there is no other remedy except to restore the fistula to its proper place without delay according to this form: If not, if there is no other remedy except to restore the fistula to its proper place without delay according to this form: uncover the bone a the second time with iron, and with strong medicines. When it has been uncovered, take hold of the fistula according to this form, and let the iron clamp be at a 90-degree angle, and the fistula must be narrowed until it is flush with the surface as you see here.
Then place it upon the bone without moisture, and wipe your hand with oil, and draw the clamp completely until it breaks the bone and the patient feels pain in that place where it comes into contact with the fistula if it is held in its place
and leave the dry medicines in place, as I have taught you, and when the wound heals and becomes firm, if there is still matter in the fistula. If it is easier for the patient.
When the eyes are wide open and do not suffer from any pain or discomfort, if it is easier for the patient, bind his eyes tightly.</start_of_turn>
Then do the same, then put on a bandage or dressing in a clockwise direction, then put some oil on it and apply acaice, aloe, incense, and ochre, and then strain the oil, and cover it with bandages and cloths.</start_of_turn
And keep the cloths in place if you take cloths thick enough, and double the layers in threes, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount of hair there is between them.</start_of_turn
Then strain with the hands of a strong bandage, and repeat the dressing in a clockwise direction.</start_of_turn
Then break the blisters and leave the oil strained for a while both day and night, and if it sticks, as you must know, pull it out whole.
Then break the wound afterwards the oil and the nut, and if you see the oil regain its place, that is good
otherwise; if it recurs, leave the dressing and the nut and the wound and the blisters until it is healed.
Dou derrompement de toile uvee. When dislocation comes in the armpit, then open it, and bring forth paper as with one grain of resin, and it is expected to see;
then if you see it covered, the work is like that of biting a needle at the root of the limb until it is below, then put in another needle or there is double thread at the elbow And let the fire penetrate, and leave the first splinter as it lies according to its position.
Then hold the fire firmly in place with a pair of forceps and grasp a portion of the iris with one hand, stretching it well; then pull out the splinter and put on oil of lint liberally bound in eggshell
And leave it until the blood has clotted with the iris, then cure the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed
And never is the wound held back by the surrounding tissue of a circle of fat until it is healed
And if the eyes are very swollen, if you prick at the fatty tissue that comes from the middle of the oil, correct the moistness of the pus and bring down the swelling, and put something between them;
Then pull out the [foreign object] until it is whole.
This ailment which is called "alcunnati" is not fierce except for the swelling which is assembled in oil, resembling descending water, and this is not plain water.
and the manner of appearance of the work is that if you make the patient sit on a chair that appears low and straight, then grasp the head between your hands from two parts, and move it until you see the swelling coming down to your eyes then either tie it up, and do not let it descend and be broken, see the light, and see the patient do things as he used to before;
and if it does not descend spontaneously, like water, and if the swelling descends only partially, as we have said
If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sponge and place it on the cornea of the eye I by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as long as the eyebrow is visible.
And when it comes out, if you distill in hot oil mixed with honey, or vinegar or fennel boiled with honey, then let it be cured of another remedy until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
from the bowl of the oil We have seen in the wounds the resemblance of worms in their division, and what it is necessary to pierce.</start_of_turn if in work in accordance with health.</start_of_turn
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, and take light from the sun, and bind the oil clean and tighten the mouth firmly.</start_of_turn
Then put the thumb of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right.
Then take in your right hand if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called the “almagda,” or in your left hand if the eyes are right.
Then put the tip of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a hair in that which there is a greater amount of oil, then hold the instrument called the “almagda” firmly, and withdraw your hand until it touches the oil, and feel that the “almagda” has reached the empty space
and that the measure of the “almagda” should be at the level of the measure of the space from the armpit to the end of the shoulder blade And this is the navel of oil.
If you see the bone in that membrane by the clarity of the rough cloth, and then put the instrument almost until the liquid is gone, and press down slightly afterwards.
If the pain increases now, if you see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest, a little, when the liquid returns the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is held firm and does not rise, if it is strained too much around your hand and your hand, then strain the bandage lightly around your hand and your hand
And then put back in the liquid a little bit of gum, and leave away that oil from there Then put by force oil-soaked tampons or soaked cloth in rose oil and plenty of eggs, and tie with clean oil.
Yes, and those who are of our household, put on common broth with plenty of eggs.
And if the almagda cannot enter the oil by its hardness, because there are parts of bones that have too many hairs, it is recommended that you take the instrument which is called the “alberit,” which is like this in shape:
And pierce then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep, but make it firm, then put the gum in, as we have said;
And at the end of the work, appears to the patient I the sleeper, lying on his back in the dark;
Or be commanded to abstain from all movement, and take gentle food, and do not move his head forward or backward, or to the side, and keep him still according to his condition until three days have passed.
Then loosen him in this house alone, and uncover his face, and let him see nothing, and then bring him back to his place until seven days have passed.
And do not do anything else in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but only that you nourish him, for because of this the pain has increased greatly
since the oil must be loosened before the seventh day, and given to this which alleviates the abscess
When he is calmed, if you remove the vein and put a little I orilliet on his face to cover any wound, and be sure to keep it in that dark place.
Then go out of the house and out, and in his case he will recover naturally;
and let the wounds be such that no disciple should interfere in this case. And one came to us from Yrach who told us that in the peace of peace he did often see all the maggots fall down when the vinegar was poured, but he never saw that happen anywhere else, neither did he read of it in the books of the ancients; and it is a new thing that has happened by chance
These are the signs of the forms of maggots, for those who do not know them will not recognize them
And let them be again properly: And their heads are of this same subtlety, and their backs in two angles like an eagle.</start_of_turn>
And let them be again properly: For often at birth or at death various hairs seem like scorpions in their mouths;
and if there are such things or if there is hair entangled in yellow pus, and if there is hair of bone colour. In that where these hairs are blunt and do not entangle, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun;
In that where these hairs are blunt and do not entangle, you must make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; cover his nose and spit on those hairs, and pull them out forcefully then hold that which you have pressed to support the soft part acutely from one side, until you are sure that that hair is entirely bony
And if nothing remains, if the opening has all its subtle instruments lightly, if nothing settles down; and if it does not settle, or if the incision bursts open, or if it is too late; for such a thing should not be attempted.
and if it is malignant pus, hasten and cauterize until it is dry and the char is stiff; then leave or remove it easily and with pain or wine.</start_of_turn> If it does not yield, and moisture comes up to the palate, evacuate the purulent matter that is healthy.</start_of_turn
and if moisture does not flow as it should, evacuate the purulent matter from the bone beneath, because the instruments do not go in too deep.</start_of_turn
Then you must take hold of the limb with a thumb and four fingers, and keep your hands steady, and there should be no space between each finger or less. and put the patient’s hand over the head of the shoulder at the base of the thumb, and keep smelling until it comes out of the socket
and do this many times, and it is a light thing for one who sees it done;
then hold the limb coming from the socket with one hand, and the limb coming from the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other as we have said before.
Do this until you are sure that the bone is not broken, then pull the limb out, wipe the blood, and moisten the thumb with Egyptian balsam, and reset the limb in its place as before
Fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char.
Do so for three days or more, until the swelling has eaten away all that is decayed of flesh; and then put on or take away a compress of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them.</start_of_turn>
This is the form of the instrument for drawing out the head, from which we distill the oils and medicines or not.</start_of_turn>
Or of silver, like an overblown lamp, if like a cord, and it is carried along.</start_of_turn
And if you see it, if you make a closed cord, and the instrument is smooth for purging the head.</start_of_turn
And he has one hand clasped at the shoulder to hold it when we pour oil or no liquid.
From the shoulder joint downwards to the hand.
Many times there arises at the shoulder no disease which is called "telul," and grows and becomes large to such an extent that it is seen;
and therefore you must first pull down the bone somewhat, and then put the cautery or burning medicine out;
and if it is delayed in covering it when it is large, if it has turned white, of foul colour, of poor sense
if you do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when you touch it once, there comes great harm to the patient
And if the abscess bursts with a soft touch, not of fierce color, you see that you can cover it up completely; if the patient vomits and recoils in fear, cure the limb of dry and restraining things.
Do as much as you know until you sense that the hair has not been corrupted; then draw the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian fashion, and reattach it as before; do this for three days or more, until the hair has consumed all that remains of the char; and then put on or remove a cauterizing bougie for a few days as long as it remains sound, and if there is a need for sedative medicines, if necessary; and this is the form of the instrument for extracting the head, from which we distill the oils and medicines or not.
It is therefore necessary that this does not happen at all, if you see that the wound is fresh with all its blood; then immediately join the two limbs to a splint, and then treat it until it is healed;
and if the limbs are already dislocated from one side and the other, if you must support all the parts of their limb until they bleed, then reassemble the two limbs to a splint, and strain them, and sprinkle upon them dragon’s blood powder and incense And put upon the wound a piece of dressing of great or other soft dressing that sticks, and leave it until it bleeds by itself, and then cure it of swelling until it is healed.
If the dressing is held in place, and the solution is assembled: or by needles, as we have said in the wound of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you
of the separation of the layers of the skin.
At home, there are often grains of sand in the open wound, like grains of wheat, minor and greater
therefore it is necessary to tear the wound open, and open up each knot, and take hold of it with tweezers and pull it out whole;
Then apply the broth after the incision of the carbuncle boils, until the wound is dry.
Then let the broth drain easily, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
Many times blood appears on the gums like little garlic cloves, which they formerly called "albulus".
If you hold it firmly and grasp its root, and leave the blood or the blood vessel alone;
Then put out the boiling carbuncle, or other restraining and drying powders
and if it comes back after the incision, and happens many times, if the root grasps it a second time, and cauterize it. If it does not return naturally after the cautery.
Never are they assembled at the head of the dens, in the mouth between the gums, shields that are burdensome and harsh; Never are the teeth black and yellow and toward, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the teeth biting;
If you command that the patient sit between your hands, and his head rests in your stomach, and open the teeth or the shields wide, until nothing remains. And so make blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other spots, until they are gone
And if its bone is fractured at the outset, that is well. If not, if it starts to swell up again the second time and the third, as long as you still have everything;
and the teeth that are driven out must have various forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, for the roots of the teeth which we must extract are of different forms than those which are between the teeth and these forms and others appear before you.
You must take care that you do not make the tooth worse with your treatment, for this must not be done because it is a very sticky substance, so we have no excuse for leaving it
Therefore, when the patient is unable to bear pain, if you are certain that he can endure it. Many times the patient complains of pain, whether it is acute or chronic, and makes the limb tremble. and indeed the pain does not depart from him until the evil is banished, because we have already wished to make them well;
when you are very certain of the pain that is groaning, if you wish, you must press the limb down firmly in order to stop the swelling from all parts
then move the limb forward or backward slightly at the first moment and then fix it firmly; and if the patient’s limb hangs between the buttocks, hold it firmly if it does not move
After that, if the tooth sticks directly forward, and if it does not jump up, take no one of these instruments and hold it loosely in the cheek; and move it as you did before.
if the disease is perceived and mixed, if you cover it with cloths, the pus or the hole is left open. If the strained thing is gently held, it will not break when strained.
You must keep your mouth absolutely quiet over the joint to prevent loosening the teeth
Take care that you do not break it, and leave some of it, and return to the patient with the greater pain of the first time
Beware that you do not do anything like the ignorant who, by their haste and boldness, break the limb every time and bring no benefit except what we have told you
But it often happens by the loosening of that great disease from its roots or from the breaking of the limb, as we have often seen
When the flesh is raw, wash the limb with wine or vinegar and oil.
If blood comes, which often happens, use a little vitriol to stop it
If this does not suffice, if the burn cauterize.
If this is not enough, if the burn cauterize. The forms of the instruments, indeed silent at first, are either long and pointed or broad-handed, that they do not double while you draw out the tooth.
These are the forms: And be of large members if they do not bend when drawing, and be made of iron indeed well, and be toothless so that they may be held by hand
from the root of the tooth. When the root is grasped while drawing out, if you must put out the wet cotton swab in the burn I or II, as long as the wound is raw, because there remain the fangs which are called “algefri,” for the head of the shoulder seems like the beak of a sparrow
These are made in the same way as with a file and this is the form
If the roots do not suffice to support all these tensions, then it is recommended that you uncover the bark entirely around the root, and place the instrument called «althali», which is to say a palainche, since this is its form:
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps by this, that is good;
If not, if you aid with all your tools, and if the forms come afterwards:
And if one uses this instrument which has teeth, since this is its form: And other instruments that are before in the ratio of the teeth, and this instrument which appears like a great clamp, of which this is the form:
And let your tools be strong that they cannot break, and nails like the teeth of beasts of prey. And so with other tools, which are not counted here;
and he himself will find the right instrument according to his work and his ailment, for there are various diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument because of the diversity of things; and if he breaks anything by chance with his hand or with anything else, or if he carries it, if he seeks these instruments, as I have said, and assists with gestures, so that this is the form:
And let them be great and firm to hold the bone, that they do not escape, but can hold and restrain.
Then restore the limb of medicine suitable for this one, and if there is inflammation in the bone, and it is small, if the disease has all these instruments:
When the tooth appears does not match the natural curve, and the shape is harmful, and even in women of gentle birth, if you know that it will not come out on its own, and is not in its rightful place, and cannot be soothed or comforted
Therefore the rasp; And if it is hollow with the tooth, take this instrument which has a small beak like I, and be like iron without a cut at the top
And when the tooth persists in the gums and hands are clasped for a long time due to the duration of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, if it appears, it can be limed, if you use a file of the same shape as the tooth itself
And it is thus like when we make needles.
And thus like when we hold the teeth firmly in place with thumbs and index fingers, if they do not move until they bleed
Then the limb at the end has no sensation, and if the bone is too bent and it breaks the tongue, if you must restrain the biting until it is even, so that it does not break the tongue or impair speech
When the front teeth are loose, by percussion or biting, and the patient cannot press on what hurts him except when he bleeds, and you cure them with restrictive medicines, this is useless;
if you must restrain them with gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and corrupts, but the blood does not move anymore.
And let the son of the middle be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
And if you see the teeth leaning towards each other, if you take hold of the thread and double it between the two front teeth, then put the nails between the middle teeth, as many as there are, until you see clearly up to the sound tooth on the other side. Then continue the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and cautiously, so that it does not move again
And let the suture be at the root of the tooth if it cannot escape.
Then grasp the nails of the thread with tweezers, assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth and the suture so that it does not catch the tongue;
Then leave it [the dislocation] somewhat tight as much as it can stay put; and if it slips or the thread breaks, if the strain of another thread.
if it should remain and hold it securely, and this is the shape of two teeth and the arrangement of two thumbs, as you see:
When the tooth is loosened, if we reset it in its place, fresh and new, as we have said.
and nothing else should intervene between them except for wisdom and solace, and never make it the shape of a decayed tooth, and put it back in its place or where the defect is, and strain it as we have said, and it will remain secure and serve its purpose for a long time
Never is this life which comes from the tongue or nature that we are not born into. or by an accidental wound beneath the skin;
and the work is such that you must bite the mouth of the patient, and put your head in his body, and he will hold his tongue
then you must bite the large nerve, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is delay or not, it is a remedy for wounds, if you can bring back the joint and bite the large one again
and keep that the fracture is not too deep, because of the artery which comes from below;
and when you have done this, if you lift the limb of rose and easily, or of cold water, then put the tongue back in a little attempt of silk;
The sick man complains that at night his limbs do not cease tormenting him, that they cannot be comforted.
And when blood comes out, if it is from a vein that has been broken, it brings with it a piece of glass; If it does not stop, if you cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then you must cure it in another way while it is still healthy
and if you see black or red or hard pus, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is an abscess
and if it is declining with moisture, if there is moisture, if it breaks, and you wipe it off with a subtle sponge, and you deliver from both sides; And if it does not go without pain to your work, put on a broken glass shard as long as it is stained, and then return to your work until you have finished all your business.
then lift up your limb easily and cautiously, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed
Des apostemes de la gorge. Never comes from the throat a boil that is called "godath", and the name has two almonds; and when you treat them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
if it is a hard abscess of little size and color of blood, do not touch it with iron.
and if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, even for the evacuation of blood; But leave it as long as it is strong, and when it is ready, you must take it out, or else it will break by itself.
And if it is of pale color and the root is flexible, if the instrument has been applied to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is firm and calm.</start_of_turn>
Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his arms at his sides, and cover his mouth and grasp his beard between his hands, and press the tongue downwards towards the instrument, for this is the shape.</start_of_turn
And it may be of silver or gold, as with a knife.</start_of_turn
Can you press the tongue towards the instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the sponge and put it into the opening, and draw it out more than you wish.</start_of_turn
And take no heed of the threads with it, then hold the cup to the instrument, for this is its form, that seems like a force. And behold that the head of the cup is bent, and one place is opposite the other, and they are very acute, and is made of iron or tin:
And if you do not have this instrument, if you can hold the wound tight, for this is the fashion: And be split from one side and from the other side name.
And when you have grasped one of the almonds, if you grasp the other according to this manner, and afterwards make an incision, gargle the patient with hot water, hot and easy, and remove the blood that comes out, if you gargle the patient with hot water, or if there are pomegranate seeds or myrtle berries, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; Then the treatment must be such that it be healthy;
Then the treatment must be such that it be healthy, and never again are there other abscesses in the throat except the two almonds, if the teeth are thus strong as the two almonds always.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the throat, namely one abscess of little size
and had the throat well closed, so that the woman could neither vomit through the passage that was blocked, nor could she eat or drink, and died because she fainted from pain in one or both of them
And the abscess was so large that it had forced out two stones through the two holes of the neck
I have often seen this, and I have bound one with an incision, then the patient went away, and he brought back great portions of vomit;
Then he should spit out the other part into the other part where it does not want to stay, and he should cover the mouth and press the tongue;
Then he should put the ointment on these abscesses, and close one part, and only a little blood should come out from there. And so he should loosen the windpipe from the throat of the woman, and now start to drink water and then wine, and do not stop biting this abscess for a long time
and the abscesses were coming back, and filled the belly as I had avoided vomiting, until they brought out large amounts of matter.
Therefore I grasped it and cauterized it inside the throat: Then it makes sense crosswise;
Then it departs from these parts, and only God knows what will be done to it after me.
De l’uve.
When the wound descends into the limb, and it flees and becomes long, if it is called "perpendicular".
and if it is thick and round, it is called "wound".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit me, and you see that the wounds are appeased, and it is subtle, so you must cover it
and that which is round and assembled and is not long and it is bloody or dark brown in color or black, so you must avoid the incision of the vein. For there is great peril for the patient.
It is fitting therefore, when you see it, as I have said, with its splendor and length, that you make the patient sit in the sunlight, and press the tongue to the instrument mentioned above. Then insert the ointment in the eye, and draw out the dirt, and close with two instruments that I mentioned when incising the two almonds
And it is fitting that you do not cover more than the surplus that is beyond the natural limit;
because if you cover more, if he cries out with voice and with his throat;
and afterwards, use what was said concerning the incision of the two almonds, and heal as long as it is healthy
And if the patient has fear of covering, you must know that you must use an engine in the cautery in the direction of the fear.
And the manner of the cautery if it is acute is harsh and severe And it is that the patient places his head in his mouth, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or the chapter of cautery, and grasps with a sharp instrument, if it is neither too thick nor too thin. and grasps with the cheek of this instrument, for this is the form:
Or he has a beard or something puts the medicine, as with the nails of a claw, and puts the instrument over the medicine;
and the patient should remain standing beside his chest, so that saliva and mucus come from his mouth over the medicine, if it does not go down to the throat, and he bleats.
then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the wound, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it scab over and the bites of the medicine are appeased
If you see it, take hold and encircle with no instrument, and moisten the cloth with medicine, and hold the instrument to its full extent within the wound until the cloth sticks to the limb.
Do it often, until the cautery is complete, then leave it dry, and cut after three days or five.
And if you must repeat the cautery with medicine, if you repeat it, and after the cautery wipe around the limb with a cloth, tightly packing cotton around it, and bind up what is around the medicine
Be bathed in cold water, and be cured of hiccups as long as you are well
This treatment is better than an incision, than the cautery.
If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus, isop, origanum, rue, chamomile, chamomile, and ivy, and mix them all together in a pot, and put them in boiling.
And the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot put the instrument that is to be cauterized according to this method: And it may be of silver or lead, and the one of the instruments should be pricked in the patient’s mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the opening, until the eye is numb.
Repeat this several times until the eye is dry, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the burning of the abscess, for many things happen And do not force this [cautery] fire except at the decline of the abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, take a needle and put in the head of the patient a little egg, so that the patient does not suffer too much heat; because the egg does not make the vapor irritate the mouth, and that is a good cure in general.
Many times has it happened at the gorge bone or thorn of fish, or nothing;
So you must therefore treat what you see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing
and what is not seen and is returned to the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach By chance, if this thing is revealed by vomiting.
or the patient swallows a sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; and I tie the sponge with a thread, and then I transfix it and when it comes back, if it is vomited, I will pull it out again with force
and if it does not come out by itself, I will take an instrument to grasp it in this fashion:
either the instrument is curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and the head is raised up and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it is alive, do not break the bone inside
And the movement is worth that the patient keeps the instrument, because either the movement is wanting or the thing is out of place. if the limb goes back, or if it is forced too much with all the instrument equally, as much as it is forced.</start_of_turn>
And let the tongue rest curved at the root if it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all do not live, do not push the bone inwards; and must that the patient hold the instrument, because it is either moved or the matter is disturbed; if the epiglottis is swallowed, or he forces it out with all the instrument equally, as much as he is able.
There is never medicine without bloodletting, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines.</start_of_turn> and when this does not help, then look at the patient’s face in the sunlight, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.</start_of_turn
And if you see the limb without support, if it has a slight twist or subtle tension that persists.
If this is not the case, take a needle and pierce the patient’s throat, then insert or pull out the needle with the cautery, and do this often. If the patient suffers from acute pain throughout.
then take full notice of cold water, and cover the mouth, and let the vomit go in the direction of swallowing, and move your hand often.</start_of_turn And if the joint is pressed with the hand, if it feels pain, it must be released.
And if it does not yield as we have said, if the patient is tormented by excessive pain, with the instrument which I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
do it often, for it will be of service to the point.
And the manner of fumigation is that you take one pot or there are charcoal pieces, and that the part to be treated is covered with a cloth about a mile wide, and that is pierced through at the point of the instrument
then I pour the fumigation, and the patient places the root of the tongue in his mouth, closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out but comes out only through the eye
And now the wound is weeping, and if it does not stop, repeat the fumigation many times.
And the patient is suffering from thirst, eating foul and dirty things, and does not drink water
Therefore, it is necessary to force her to vomit by this treatment
And the form of the instrument with which we treat the wound, if it is seen, is like tongs to grasp the tongue so that it can enter the throat It has the shape of a cork-cutter, and has the bitterness of lime, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;
The wounds caused by the opening of an abscess are like those remembered from one place and another in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; for in two ways it is like the one which has moisture in it.
And the second method if the limb is hanging loose or fixed to the bone.
for the swelling of the head is different from that of the bone, and the swelling of the limb is different from that which comes at the joints, and the flesh itself judges in the work.
And if the abscesses are not to be perceived, as long as the belly is dead according to its fulfillment;
as those which must be perceived when they are solid, and do not die according to their fulfillment, like an abscess which is between joints
for when the swelling comes from the joints, and we leave it as long as it is stiff, by chance if the bone and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, because of this there is contraction in that limb.
or if the abscess is between the main member and the head of the member, and you delay the perforation until it is measured, it will go to the main member;
Or if it is from the root that the wound has proceeded, if one pricks it again, that it should not be killed.
Or it must only be pierced at the root end where digestion is running its course, except for the wound that is from the root, which must not be opened, but must be left along, and there will be fistula. It cannot be cured in a great time.
And it must be known that you should wait for the pain to subside and the swelling to go down, and the fading of the heat, and the absence of pain and redness, and the debate and the tingling of the root of the abscess, and the other signs;
And it must be known that you should make the perforation or break more dependent on the abscess, and the place where it breaks loose.</start_of_turn>
And let the perforation be through the long of the bone, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these things let the hairs be equal or there shall be no pus. In these cases, according to the location of that limb.
And when the wound is open in flesh, if you do not perceive that it is confirmed in digestion accompanying it, as we have said
For if you pierce before this, if it yields the bone marrow of it, and is full of thick mucus; and by chance toughen the flesh and pierce it through with it.
And if there is no wound perceived according to the large wound mark, according to what the limb has suffered.
Therefore it is necessary to bring in little abscesses, little perforations; and many cuts according to the greatness of the abscess.
and if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to close it quickly, and cover it over. When it is necessary to stretch as I do a drape, and is softened, then it is possible to do as with bubbles.
and if there are such as are split into three angles, and if there are such as we handle like the fennel of Myrtle, like apostemes of grapes;
and if there are such as we make a round size, and other sizes and similar to cope them
Those who have no head, if like a superficial wound, you must simply pierce through;
and when the wound is large, and it has collected great blood, you must pierce through, but do not extract all the blood in that hour, but only a part Then I press the abscess right up to the other ear, and leave it without doing anything further. Do this many times with great force, until the swelling is completely gone.</start_of_turn>
Likewise, if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old hunchback.</start_of_turn For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Therefore avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived the abscess, if the wound is small, look to see if the wound at the abscess is small.</start_of_turn And if it is a large wound, if you can, try to insert linen or old cotton.</start_of_turn And if it is a large abscess, and there is much pus, you must know that you must bite in the cheekbone two fingers so that one overlaps the other.</start_of_turn
And if you have grasped in the abscess a part of raw leather, and you have bound it around, then you must know that you must fill it with much cotton or lint of flaxseed towards moisture, and keep it until three-fourths.
Then the bone, and keep it oiled until it is healed
And if blood evacuates from your work, if you fear cold and ease, and moistness I drape, and take out the decorative limb many times.
And if blood continues to discharge, if you mix with government and care, and the powders that I have mentioned before, and if it is cold or wet, or if the wound or the abscess is moist and nervous, then you must put on a cover and moisten with wine and oil
And if it is in this state, and the limb is swollen, if you must put on moist dressings with water and oil, or with wine and oil.
Then take away the abscess, drain it, and treat it if necessary until it is healed.
This is the translation of the last line of the given text.
Or as you have said previously, thus must it be in the treatment of abscesses, and thus must it be in this chapter.
Or if small abscesses come out, and they are like those that are in towels, thus as the juice of a gooseberry, and there is resemblance in them.
There are greasy ones and such as when there is moisture like pus;
And if there are such ones that are tough and stony at the root, and there is no doubt that the artery is not opposed to it.
And as for the work of the surgeon, if you suspect that everything that is called "entromissor" has come out, which thing contains what, etc.
For if it contains moisture, it remains for a long time
When the moisture is drained, if you leave the peel that contains that moisture, it will return as before when you leave it alone
Then plunge the cotton into the Egyptian poultice if it is present. If not, in water and oil, and use the bandage, and leave it until the other day and that which is remaining will depart on its own
And when you renew the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are certain that it does not remain in place
Then cure the wound of the poultice when it is appropriate, until it is healed
And if the abscess persists without fat, if the physician follows this form, for a long time and if it discharges your medicines, and the pus from all parts, and puts all your care to drain for the swelling or where it is located
And if the artery opposes you, if you do what I have said afterwards.
And do the same with an abscess that is pierced, and cut and cure as I have told you
And the size of the pierced abscess and the moisture, if it is less severe, because they are of little blood. And if there is no swelling in the abscess or the head or there is no moisture, and these are old abscesses that I cauterise or heads from old women;
and find the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and cannot burst and if there is no blood vessel nearby, we must make a wound as if with a stone.</start_of_turn>
In other abscesses coming from the head or the shoulders, because these arise from the joints of the limbs and the roots of the ears, they open all the more on the most dependent limb because of moisture.
And so they must be cured as they ought.
Often these abscesses occur at the collarbone, and the armpits, and in the groin, and never elsewhere or on the bones, and are bloody, and are joined together.</start_of_turn
And indeed, every swelling must be properly treated within its container, as we have said before regarding its base and apex. And their signs are many.
And their signs are many. There are also cases where the body contains moisture, and if there are maligns that do not wish to obey health.
In such a case that you see a bone in a good position to the touch, and that looks like flesh, soft partly and not red like blood, neither dark as the marrow of the bone nor pale as the cartilage of the joint, and that is neither superficial nor deep;
Then you must hold it together with sutures and a soft dressing, and if you must touch it, do so with two fingers as we have said in the previous instances concerning the apex of the swelling
And thus they do go back and forth, and so it is necessary that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not be too hasty with the bandage or the forceps, but that your hands do not escape, and do not voice too much beforehand, that you do not cover anything that you should not.
And if you cover the vein or the artery, and this does not allow you to work, if you put in the wound a piece of vitriol or some powders that remain inside, and constrain the wound; leave it until the abscess is calmed and the wound is softened, and begin to move.
When the thing is not stained, if you return to your work until you have completed it;
Then if at your command there are to be no small vesicles remaining, if the head and the tail are coped and bound.
And if there is in the root of the vesicle a great swelling, if you do not dare but to cope that vesicle at its root, but join it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging loose;
Then apply the dressing of white cotton pressed in Egyptian fashion, and then suture.
If you pull out all the pus, if you are certain that you have joined the two layers of the wound, and you sew them now, there will be no remaining pus because of the size of the abscess. If you are certain that you have grasped the root of the [disease], and that you have pulled out the foreign body, and you sew it as we have said
If you are certain that you have grasped the root of the [disease], and that you have pulled out the foreign body, and you sew it as we have said The vesicles which cause excess discharge, pierce them or they will open and die;
and pierce as before said, depending on the situation, and mix with ointment and similar things, so that it removes what remains of corruption; And when the wound is well closed, if the dressing of ointment covering the wound is sufficient, while it is healthy
The ancient ones spoke and wrote of the size of the gorge; but I have never seen anyone in our land who has performed it, and it is the writing of their words.
As for those who have a squint, it is necessary that the slit of the throat called the epiglottis be cut away and this does not help, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those which have been cauterized in the mouth, or the throat or in the two armpits.</start_of_turn>
When the disease is in the channel of the blood vessels, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss of blood from strangulation.</start_of_turn
It is therefore necessary, when our tongues cut the epiglottis, to cut three circles or four, a small slit through two circles or according to the quantity of the slit of the epiglottis, not through the cartilage.</start_of_turn>
And if the limb is coved with the epiglottis, there is no hair, and the vessel is long and thin.
And if the master is fearful, if you must cover the skin of the throat to the chin, then cut as much as you will until you reach the nail; Avoid the blood vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then close the wound as we have said.
And it is shown by the section of the windpipe that the spasm arises from the broken bone, and by the defect of speech;
And leave the wound open for a piece.
When the hour has passed without coving, doubt the strangulation, join the two layers of the wound of the limb, and close it all around the cartilage
Then administer medicines that cause the growth of hair, as long as they are sound.
The wound is not made whole until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default is abandoned. So you must place your hand on the epiglottis for the patient does not vomit, and he breathes through the wound; and thus is kept from death.</start_of_turn>
And so they command the old man to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they command to suture the wound and cure it, when it is cured.</start_of_turn
And I will tell you what I saw.</start_of_turn> I saw a woman who took a knife and plunged it into her throat, and grasped part of the windpipe.
And I went called to cure it, and found it as dead as death.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that had escaped from it, and saw that there was no vessel or conduit other than the throat that had been injured by the wound.</start_of_turn
I hastened, and cleansed the wound, and cured it until it was healed
and did not cause her any more pain, since it returned to its natural state.
Therefore I believe that in the dressing of the epiglottis I did not find any fear.
These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and are great abscesses in the color of jaundice, and are very common in women;
and there are two kinds of them: natural and accidental
or the natural one has no cause
And the cause of the accident is twofold: sometimes it is like grease that adheres to us, and sometimes it is like an abscess that comes from an artery. and there is doubt and fear, and it is not possible for me to work without fear of fire, only in that which is small, and I prove and seek all the surrounding parts: if you find it as I do not know grease, and cannot enter any vein, if it bites, as we bite the hand, and it is taken away from its covering, if there is no mark; and encircle well all around, and cure as if it should be sane once more
There are many ways in which we are like this; I will tell you of all the resemblances.
And thus it must be known that I tell of all the difference that exists between a bruise and a dislocation.
I say that dislocation is a swelling and fever that lasts as long as the inflammation persists, and is accompanied by pain; therefore rests the fever and the swelling.
With no bruise there is neither fever nor swelling nor pain, and there is pus, which is its own sac, and it is like the color of blood, and it begins like a wound and becomes large
and they are like boils, or grease, or moisture, and fluid of the color that I have mentioned before
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the knot, to ask and inquire first about all the instruments which are called “instruments of extraction,” according to the form that comes or the treatise that follows.
And the way to inquire about abscesses of the veins is that you take more moisture from the vessel than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs and little fingers inward, until you know that the instrument has grasped the hair, and only then do you proceed according to the size of the abscess
Then withdraw the entomissor and take hold of the leap that forces.
When moisture covers it completely, that is when its color becomes dark; if it is so as I have said of other incisions.</start_of_turn>
and if afterwards the entomissor does not bring moisture, if it is greasy, if it is so, grasp it with tweezers and pinch it slightly from the edge and hold the cloth tightly over the area where you have pierced it until it is well bled;
and if you do not draw it out whole, if you tear it to pieces, so that nothing remains.</start_of_turn>
For if nothing remains, it comes back to us many times.</start_of_turn
And if it lingers a little while, and you grieve not, if you employ the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, hold the wound steady, and apply soothing things around the circumference; and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if it is great, if cut the two pounds of the wound, and cure it of that which engulfs flesh.
And if the vein swells up against you or another if you are hasty and use broken glass, and leave it for two or three days, until the wound is healed, and rest the swelling of blood Then return to covering that which remains delayed from now on.
See here the forms of the entrapped instruments, and there are three ways: Great, middle, and small;
There are three quarters which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways of doing it. Great, middle, and small, to encompass the fistulas of fistula.
And they are like needles which we sew up wounds, and they are of saffron, or iron, or silver, and the thread is yellow, and it is more proven with black soot to encompass the cortices of fistula
There are three ways of doing it Great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the wound
The shapes of the wounds are like clusters of seeds, as you can see here:
Great, medium, and small; and if there are three corbels of three ways each,
and if there are onicules which have three corbels, and are also of three ways.
and if there are onicules which have two corbels, and onicules of one corbel only, and are of three ways
and all these things are necessary in their place.
The head of these bones is often fractured, and there are some which do not split through the middle but only from one side, from which we must protect the nerves, because if we do not, we split the vein or the nerve.
and from these intrusions are the bones which are placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not lose them when the abscesses are opened
And there are three methods: And there are three methods: great, small, and medium, as you see.
and do not use them except in the case of bone fractures, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar things.
and never make another small instrument, like the handles of fists, according to this form, because it stops the blood And do not put it on any part which has recently bled, and has veins, and never again according to this great form:
Never swell the breasts of the sick when they begin to decay, as they seem like female breasts
and endure pain and escape, and whoever sees them cured, if he covers them according to this form from line .b. up to line .g.: Then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicinal poultice thickly smeared with char, and assemble the two layers of the wound with stitches, and cure until it is healed.
and if the mother’s milk flows downwards, and is softened by its greatness as with women, if it comes out through two ribs below, through two similar incisions; then the larger line should contain the smaller one according to this form, from this line B up to line G then scrape off the skin between the two layers, and bone the fat, and mix in what we have said about stitching and powders, and anything necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
If he is not well, or the incision is not thoroughly made, because the patient does not wish to rest, or for the discharge of blood, if you must, fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive order. And leave it until it has consumed the remnants and fat, then cure it when it is well healed.</start_of_turn>
And let him leave it [hair] until it has eaten up the remaining fat and grease; then cure it when it is healthy
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.: And when all the hair in the abscess is drained out, if the wound is of great extent, apply a piece of cotton wool, and leave it in place until the other side is reached, then extract all the cotton wool, and cure the wound that has resulted from this until it is healed.
And if the abscess appears like boils, if you do as we have said about incisions of boils, and if the wound has penetrated the hair, if necessary perform cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is open, and the skin is split which is above, if there are many abscesses there, and also in the vein running away and splitting;
and if the surgeon knows that it is for the artery, if the abscesses are long and deeply embedded.</start_of_turn When you sense it, if you sense it is drawing;
And when it is a vein, if it is reopened suddenly, it must be cauterized at a distance.
It is foolish to close this incision too soon, and the same when there are abscesses and boils, or wounds of the head and teeth, and in the mouth of other bones, it is much the same. You must withdraw the cautery, and the one at the head must also withdraw, and in that where the artery is inflamed by the above, the skin will become long
then you must carefully move the limb, and withdraw the artery from the wound, until it is uncovered;
then you must pull out the awl, and make it pierce until the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples
Then point out the limb that is between the two bonds of an introversion until it is loose there; and sever the aponeurosis.
Then support the cure that embraces the wound, until it is loosened; and hold the bone tight Then treat the swelling that follows this, until it is healed; and let it rest
and if the abscess is the size of a vein, if you can, hold your hand over the abscess as much as possible, and then pierce the vein with a needle at the same place, and pass two threads through, so that you can grasp it from the other side; then tie the aponeurosis, as I have said, or bind two parts of it with two threads each;
And if you doubt that the wound does not bleed, if it returns a third splinter at the site of the first splinter, hold the wound steady for three days.
Then close the wound as much as necessary until the bleeding stops, and keep the wound clean and dry until the discharge has ceased; leave only what is bound over the wound
Then apply a wet dressing of wine and oil, and bind the wound with sutures and compresses until it is healed
Then apply a warm compress soaked in wine and oil, and then bandage the wound until it is healed.
This often happens when the surrounding bones are diseased or broken, or when there are joints involved, and it is the cause of many postmortem changes, and its color is like that of saffron, and is a sign of numerous affections of the body in pain
And when it is strained, if the patient feels pain, and does not wish to move for fear of pain, but groans with fear;
he remains silent in all parts, neither goes forward nor backward, neither does he move from side to side, and that which is in the joints cannot be covered with iron. because by chance it may go into contraction; and the skin that is over the head, shoulder or front, makes the leather wrinkled
and the skin that is over the head, shoulder or front, makes the leather wrinkled If the swelling is small, if the limb has a slight tension, and one grasps it at its root;
and if it is large, if the swelling has reached the bone, and the bone is bruised, and the wound is opened, and the bone is brought together at the suture, and the wound is cured when it is healed.
Never before have I seen such a thing in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease which is called "funge" because of its resemblance to barley, and its root is subtle, and its head is large.
and there are small and great swellings in it.
and I saw two people who had it in their bellies who seemed more like barley than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thick root, and were split open, and there was moisture coming out of them
I dressed them and found one of them weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six and a half pounds, and the works on the incision if you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the blood is pale and moist and has a subtle root. If the scapula at the greater wing be tense, and if it be in your presence the fire cautery.
If the scapula at the greater wing be tense, and if it be in your presence the fire cautery. For in your presence comes often too great discharge of blood, and if you delay, if you do not hasten, then indeed you must cauterize;
and if you see the patient groaning and fearful from the incision of the wound, if you take a thread of silk well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then the restraint, and do not cease to tighten the thread of silk until it holds the artery, and ask him to work for you;
and if the roots are large, if there is fear at the same time on the other side for the belly, but you must well cover half, then cauterize what does not return
Then treat the wound and keep that you do not cover the hair which is of a harsh color and of poor sense and of milk-like discharge.
For it is an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the cure of the abscess later.</start_of_turn>
When the head of the shoulder is for. Then if a bubble appears, it comes from the cautery of the wound or from a bursting of a cyst, and is above the belly and in the chest, as it happens in other ways, or blood that clots veins or arteries according to what is before, or from swelling;
And if it is through the opening of the cyst and the coming out of the bubble, if it is the color of the abscess, it seems like the color of blood, and is a light matter causing little pain, and is open from various issues. and if it is from the bursting of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with the hands if it returns, and then comes back, and sometimes if it is caught, it swells out at the entrance to the bath and by great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain me;
And if it is for blood, if it is widely apparent by these signs, the abscess is great and hard, and is closed according to a quantity. And if it is for wind, if it is soft at the touch, and the work is that you see if it appears to be from the blood of an artery or a vein, or wind.
And if it is for wind, if it is soft at the touch, and the work is that you see if it appears to be from the blood of an artery or a vein, or wind. If you leave the cure like that. For there is doubt and fear, as I have already said or as the chapter discusses concerning abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if it appears to be from the intestine or the bowel, if you command the patient to hold his breath, and that he strain himself thoroughly, and mark that he has evacuated everything to the bottom; Then command him to grasp between your hands, then go round the limb that you have marked throughout the circumference, and take hold of half of the abscess at its base to the greatest extent Then hold the limb firmly with a strong thread or a strong thread of silk, and keep it firmly in place.
Then expose half of the abscess that is extended over the limb, and hold your thumb and index finger, and keep the intestines in place; If you find it grasped in the limb, if you pull it out, and pull the intestines away from the belly
And if you find pus, if you grasp it with the tweezers, and drain the excess blood.
And if the artery or vein is bleeding, if it is going to burst, then go back to your work and take two needles and put two strong threads, and pass the two needles through what you have made in the form of a cross that you make pierce
Then strain the abscess in four days on the nails, and if you see, break the nails, and leave the wound alone until it bursts, and extract the pus by itself. Or you can bandage it when it is slight and soft, then cure it of what it covers, and cut the abscess as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
Or you can bandage it when it is slight and soft, then cure it of what it covers, and cut the abscess as we have said before.</start_of_turn> Then drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of what it covers, and close the wound.</start_of_turn>
And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the wound of what is necessary, and suture the wound. We have said in the division the signs of an abscess, and how one should work on it with medicine, and how one should shun the cautery treatment.</start_of_turn>
We say that an abscess is always in the marrow, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and they say that the old people often say that when an abscess is in the bone or we can break it if it is like an abscess that is in marrow, and in the marrow, and in similar things, and we must remove it when it is at its beginning.</start_of_turn
for I know of no healing for it before me.
When it is in the body or we can remove it, as we have said, you must never purge the black bile from the patient;
then make him healthy again if he has shown signs of fullness, and afterwards let the patient drink well to make the work easier
then give your ointments or plaster, and the head and all parts, and the bone of all parts round about do not leave anything undone
and let the blood flow freely, and press well the limb at your hand or at nothing, and if it breaks from the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize too much it will stain Then perform another cure while he is conscious.
De ydropisie. We have already mentioned in the preceding sections the signs of dropsy, and that when the collection of liquid is made, and the signs of congestion are similar, and the treatment which is done with medicines, and that which is done with fire.
and one must not touch the fire in these two instances: namely, tympanites and yposclerosis, because it is a deadly thing
then when you give these medicines for this sign of dropsy which is called "eclipses" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you notice that the patient is weak, or if there is another disease besides dropsy, as all other diseases and their solutions for the belly and similar things; If there is doubt, do not touch the iron, for there is danger.
If you see the patient with great strength, and he has only the hydropisy of a simple dropsy, and he is neither too lean nor too fat, then you must surely work on him. Believe the patient right on your hands, and press his belly down towards the lower part of his foot, then take the thumb of the hand that you use for this form: And let two parts be excised. almost without causing him to bleed; and do not let him scream
then look if the hydropisy is settled towards the intestines: if you think you have reached the third degree of hydropisy, do two right incisions above the navel; And if dropsy is due to liver disease, if so make a incision at the left side of the abdomen below the third rib.
And if it is due to urine, if so make it at the right side, and do not let the patient lie on the incision where the fluid will flow towards the weaker limb.
Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and extract the stone, and hold your hand over the wound with all your might between the skin and the cartilage as if grasping the quantity of an nail or an inch in length
Then pierce the cartilage until the muscle comes out whole, and that is the cause of the pain, then pull out the instrument, and there will be the shape of this instrument left there: And it is similar to a silver needle, and is of spider or slender barley, and has at its end a little hole. or costs from one side, three holes.</start_of_turn> and two from the other side, and one from the other.</start_of_turn
and the head is cut off like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision which is written to cut off the head.</start_of_turn
above is the nourishment, so that when the instruments come into the water, if they go into the water now;
leave half or a third of it out, for if you take out more than that in this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will vomit, or he approaches death.</start_of_turn
But in emptiness according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the provisions of the virtue to the patient signify, and his pains.
Then take the instrument and hold the pain, and it is retained now by the thumb which stamps the part which is above the scapula, as I have said, that you pierce according to this manner.
Then take the instrument again the other way, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take out a small amount of pain;
Do nothing of the sort, and take care not to use it until there remains only a little bit of pain.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you put too much pain, if the surgeon of the burial or sand burns, and by too much sweat or bath and sun, and if you take wine; And the treatment of drying medicines must be continued as long as the patient is well; and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the urine, as I have said before.
Never are children born without a mark in the belly, or the mark is small, or it is not firmly in its place.
If he coves too much and there is no sign of pain in all the surrounding area of that shape:
Then put or pull out I cloth of felt under the armpit, and bind and keep it in place for III days or IV; and when he wants to urinate, if he is kept closed, he will urinate, and then put him back again.</start_of_turn>
And by chance it must not be, for the urine that comes out will not leave him closed.</start_of_turn>
If the opening is small, if medicine is applied with lead weights, as we have said, and it swells up.
Those who do not have the head of the shoulder dislocated in their limb are blistered, for no one is born with the head of the shoulder at the top of the limb, for it will not urinate before it is elevated.</start_of_turn And they do not manage to recover because the material cannot come up to the marrow, which is a bad disease.
And if the patient lies groaning on his back, with the head of the arm and the elbow as wide as a thumb, if he breaks the bone in the middle, as it often happens;
You must take care of the evacuation of blood which often occurs, and if it occurs, if the stain of blood which stains blood is evacuated, and cure the wound as long as it is healthy
Des pustules de la verge. Many times comes the white spot in the arm, and is a sign of bad blood
and there are malignant and non-malignant;
If it is suspected that they have been grasped at I, and are pricked and pulled out, then put on moist cotton wool in the Egyptian manner. Then hold the wound dry until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the swelling is malignant, dark in color and purulent, it is advisable to apply cautery to it.
When you have grasped it, and if it is bleeding profusely from the root, and has some within the flesh and some outside, if it is suspected that the bleeding is from the root first; and when it is stopped, if the wound bleeds outwards.</start_of_turn
For when you treat it whole, if you do not keep the root firm, it will cause blackness and corruption in the root or bone.</start_of_turn
If you are certain that everything black and rotten is gone, then apply honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranates and sometimes, apply other cures until it is healed.
And if there is discharge of blood comes, if necessary, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery is useful in two situations: namely, in the case of blood clots and corruption;
and if the head of the limb is rotten and retracted, if you bite or draw out the limb a bundle of hair, and the patient pees on the wound;
and if the skin has become loose at the head of the limb which has happened with those who have not been circumcised, or there is an abscess or a wound, if you must then burn the instrument with the cautery, until the limb is freed and the head of the limb is loosened
and if this is a serious matter to be decided, then you must know that you must support it with a spasm without any blow to the head or the groin.
then dry carefully between two, and put one soft towel soaked in cold water on it, which must not be moved.</start_of_turn>
Circumcision is not merely the omission of a continuation like other wounds.</start_of_turn However, when we perform this work of our will, and do it properly, if it is necessary that we make it better, and the most pleasant for health.</start_of_turn
I say that the ancients did not teach us circumcision, for they did not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have learned through experience
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and physicians who perform circumcision in this way, have force and all a new instrument.</start_of_turn
If the urine flees like water because of two stones, and by chance if one of these comes up and stops the other below. Or the bladder recoils, and there is double pain, and with swelling which is dull and does not firmly support the point of the limb.
and with the swelling of the spleen by chance escapes the iron, repairs the work, and many times grow until they have no need of swelling and I have wished it so
Or the covering returns, and the pain is doubled, and with the support which is too slight to assure the tip of the limb; and with the support of the cord by chance escapes the iron, and completes the work, and many times it happens that they are born without any support and I want it.
For when you press your hand, if it is equally taut throughout, you can easily pull it out. but that the thread be well strained around the skin
and that the manner of the first work should make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer more than to tie the thread around the limb only lightly, and then let him do whatever he wishes
Then hold the wrist between your hands straight out, and bring back the forces between your hands or withdraw your fingers so that the fetus cannot see them, nor any of the instruments.
Then place your hand on the hip and grasp or pinch, and draw it up as high as the head of the hip is bent; Then thoroughly cleanse the area that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it so that it is secure in two other ties
Then thoroughly cleanse the area that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, and tie it so that it is secure in two other ties And hold the second tie at the waistband and the little finger, and grasp between the two ties, then stretch the skin above the wound and draw the head of the hip down Then leave the blood flow there without moving it, for that is the medicine. And I put powder on and over the powder I drape a layer of glue made from the yolk of an egg beaten with rosewater, confirmed with rosemary oil and balsam, and I leave it on until the other side is done, and I treat the other wound until it is healed.
The forces are formed at the circumference of the wound when this is the case:
When the two heads are tense and bent, and the arms are as wide as the palm of the hand:
The wound of the circumference is when the cords around the incisions are loose.
Therefore it is necessary that you extend your nails, even though it makes the wound worse
and keep it even, and if you do not manage to hold your nails, if you hold them firmly, and then treat the wound
And if it persists for three days, and what is below the navel is swollen, if you leave it until the afterpains cease and the swelling light;
if you do not move it as you wish and keep hold of the lower part of the belly, it will do you no good.</start_of_turn>
Cure therefore the wound of things that are soft with a powder, as we have said or treated with powders, and if you move it too much, it will go downwards, and it will be of no use.</start_of_turn>
Cure it as we have said until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Dou retenement de l’urine
Urine is retained if it is from the obstruction of a stone, or blood congealed, or bile, or chaff, or similar things, as we have said in the division.</start_of_turn
And if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the retention is caused by the stone which is in the kidney or the neck of the bladder, if you suspect that the patient is hunching over his knees; if the stone is placed on the back and the patient extends his belly from the part under the shoulder blades, and restrains the patient from groaning as much as he can. then the neck of the bladder is constrained towards the expression of the stone above, so that the urine flows out easily.
and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, if you suspect that there is a need for an extraction with the instrument called the «syringe», because this is its form:
And if it be of subtle silver coin, as much as a hen’s egg; And if it be of blunt silver coin, as much as half an egg, and if it is subtle at the head.
And the manner of emptying the urine is that you take two threads doubled, and bind one to the head with one inch of wool or cotton, and pass the thread through the syringe;
And cover the surplus of wool and pass the syringe up to the head of the syringe, then join the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on one chair, and raise the bladder and the verge of oil moist and oily with olive oil and warm water.
Then put the syringe gently into the root of the limb, until it reaches the base of the limb; then double the limb from above the bulge.
Then withdraw the syringe until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it coming out until it reaches the empty thing; this should not be done except in this order because otherwise it will cause damage to the body.
Then stretch the thread throughout its length, and the urine will follow the thread, then pull out the thread forcefully, and correct the urine;
And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and align the patient
When there are dropsy or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see urine and medicines distilled, if you do everything that is called the «clepsedre», which is its shape:
It is closed, and if there are three holes: Two from one side, and one from the other, as you see;
And he must bend his head downwards so that the medicine can penetrate as well as possible, if we can remove the moisture, and push firmly as is necessary.
When you see the medicine dripping in the bladder, put the chief dexterous over the moisture, and push away what is hindering.
If you remove the moisture from the dexterous, and then push strongly the hindering away If the moisture enters again inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
This is the form of the subtle fistula from which we must cure the bladder.
It is of silver or gold, and the head is more raised
And from the eye inwards, or from the joint which is hurt;
Then take a bladder of mutton and put the moisture which you see clustering in the bladder inside it, then bind it between the two armpits with a double wire, and burn the moisture on the fire.
Then pull the head of the clinker downwards into the belly, then stretch your hand over the bladder with all the moisture that comes out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder
and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around then pull the thread strongly through these holes, then assemble the circle as if you were assembling a doll, and put inside what you see of oil, moisture, and water, and bind it with the instrument.
And do as you would with a bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture goes from the bladder.
De la piere.
We have already said in the division the ways of cutting into stones, and the extraction of medicines together.
And I have said the difference between the enclosed stone and the open stone, and all the signs, and when one must work on a stone of what size; And in the bladder, and in the hip bone;
And I will tell you openly and briefly
I say that the stone which is enclosed in the bladder is often more painful when it is pushed upwards, and this is a sign that the stone has burst from the bladder as it were in its subtlety
And he opens his eye, and grasps the patient's hand, and he does it many times, and then he stiffens. And from these jumps he undermines the foundations.
And it is light to heal the wounds until they are three years old, and it is grief in old men, and is as young as middling age, to those who are between youth and old age
And it is the easier cure for those who have the big stone, than for those who have the small one
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary, we must first cleanse the patient by blistering, to drive out all the evil that is in the intestines. For it never hinders to inquire about the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lean him backwards and forth, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not move at all high up
Then make him sit between your hands appearing, and his hands should be placed on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending forward
Then the sweat and the touch within;
if you feel the stone in the cavity, if you hurry now to clamp above the stone.
and if it does not bleed at the touch, put your left thumb oil on the index finger, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young with accomplices; put the thumb in its foundation, and sweat the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, if the bladder is full at the collar
then press on your finger, and hold the stone away from the eye or you see the clamp
and instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend with his right hand the ribs above, and with his left hand to stretch the skin that is below the ribs in the part where the incision is made
Then I touch the scab with my thumb, since this is its form. And I slip between the testicles and the root, do not break through but along the left side of the navel
And be two on the stone, and two either adjoined or rooted, and be the size of the thumb if it be broad by excess, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, do not make it too large
By chance the pressure if the thumb that is or is rooted, that it leaps for work;
And nails that are part of the stone or that have angles, and margins. If it is grasped to irritate;
And if a limb is swollen, seems bulky and round, from which issue is generous.
And thus when there are angles and margins [in the swelling], make the size greater.
and if it does not burst, you must know that you must pull on the nails which are as much as a file at the head, so that you can pull out the stone if it does not escape; or you can break the instrument which is curved at the head;
and if you do not know how to handle it, if it is large the loss is lost, and if it escapes, the vein is torn;
and if there is more than one stone, if you pull out the largest at the collar of the bladder first, then go up and down, and the others afterwards if there are any.
And if it is large, if you cover it with silk, and make a greater wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or the urine comes suddenly with such force that the legs cannot support it.
but all this time you must exert yourself to break it up, or to remove the stones, until you have driven them out whole pieces;
and when you have finished your work, if you apply a poultice of incense, aloe and dragon’s blood, and hold it in place, and put upon it a soaked bandage of oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the burn; then restore the patient to his shoulder, and do not remove the limb until the third joint below
And when you have pulled it out, if there is any blood remaining in the wound from oil and water, then cure it with beeswax ointment and linseed oil, until it is healed.
and if blood clots come into the wound and swelling, and congestion of blood in the bladder, or either of these things are retained, the urine is known in this way as a part like that without leaping with the urine. Leave then the hair on the wound, and grasp that blood, for if it remains, it will burst the bladder and carry it away.
Then lift the wound slowly and easily and gently, and keep the hand still in all the ways you know, until it is healed;
And that you must tie in two stitches all the wounds that you cure, and gather the medicines above the limb.
And if the wound is small, and it is either a fistula or a pipe, and it is tied up, and the urine cannot pass; If you do not cure this, you will lose many times, and we will hear of the size of this treatment I have already seen this proven to be true
Take hold of the forceps according to this shape and be at a right angle with two teeth fixed in one socket:
Then take I thread and loop it around the root of the bone, so that it cannot go backwards into the bladder.
Then hold the thread lightly in the root, until it reaches the bone; And twist the thread with your hand at the bone both forward and backward, until you can see the bone from the other side
When the urine comes, then press your hand on what is left of the bone that is in the root If it is broken, and spurts with the urine, and is stained with blood, the patient is sick
and if you are unable to do this for any reason, then take I thread from the root of the bone and I another from above, then pull the root towards the bone between the two lines, and then extract it forcefully, and loosen the ligament, and congeal the blood in the wound And he must be treated while he is still conscious.
If you cannot do this for any reason, take hold of the bone at its upper and lower extremities, then place the thumb between the two tendons, and grasp firmly; then extract the foreign body, loosen the tendon, and solidify the blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healed.
When the stone is embedded in flesh, and if it does not happen every time, if it is cured, it is defended by three things:
one is that by chance the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that no woman can be known to be truly wise who hides her wisdom as deeply as she can, even though she is learned.
And the third thing is that it is often impossible to find a truly wise woman in this art of healing;
And the fourth thing is that if a woman’s wit is more profound than a man’s, for she can make greater progress, and has greater learning.  If such is necessary, if you take a wise woman, and prick her with your needle, and if you do not find wisdom there, you will not find it anywhere else in this world
And there is a great wisdom in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she commands that she do what you command her with the inquiry of the needle. And look well if the woman is a virgin.
And look well if the woman is a virgin. then you must push forward with all your might or foundation and ask for the stone;
and if the stone is firm, if you constrain the wound of your might, and you recommend that you hold your hand over the bladder and press and pull your left hand towards the wound
if the stone is firm, if you must move it from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the groin;
then place your hand on the stone in the groin and find the middle of the wound, where it is usually visible, and feel the stone in that part do not move it from the wound or downwards, and be careful at first small size
do not move it from the wound or downwards, and be careful at first small size Then hold your hand firm in size, if you feel the stone so large that the wound can endure it as long as the stone can rest firmly, and the stitches that many times have held wounds are:
that is to say, small and large, acute and blunt, long and round, and which have rained.
if the stones resemble these in appearance, it is known that they issue from the bladder.
And if it does not go away, if put on the spot a piece of vitriol, and hold it for an hour until it is stained;
then return to your work, until the stone is firm, and have the implements that I told you about in the extraction of the stone are at your home to help you in your work.
and if it still does not go away, and if it is a severed artery, if put powder on the spot and strain of tents and of bandage, and do not attempt it again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, but by chance the patient dies. Then treat the wound.
When the bleeding has ceased and the limb is restored, if you return to work while the bone is still stiff, as long as the bone is firm.</start_of_turn>
Then the wound is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white fat, which is as soft as the kernels of corn, that contains the yolk;
It is called "syfac", and never is it properly in the yolk if we take care that it is not something else It is the skin of the kernel between the white fat that we have mentioned
These things do not happen at all. And the generation of this moisture is from weakness that comes from the seeds, and it is spread through that material.
And never does it happen if percussion comes from the kernels, and this moisture is of many colors or it is a pale yellow, or it is without redness, or black, or pale blue, and more
And these are the signs of this assembly being completed, for if it is white or soft as we have said, if the abscess is ripe and long as the figure of a loaf, and does not bleed, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very flesh, if the abscess is ripe with a part of the yolk, and because of this it is thought to be another loaf.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the nails and the white surface, if you feel it well;
then when you know the color of the moisture, if you see it throughout the entire circumference, from where it starts to where it finishes. According to this, therefore, that which follows the introductor, judge of that which is within.
And when we draw up the nails with iron, if it is thought that the patient is cured according to some people and the filling of his flesh.
Then the shoulder rests on its back, upon something rather high, and puts a bundle of towels under it.
Then sits on its left side, and instructs the minister to sit to the right, and extends the arm to the second rib from the breastbone.
Then take the spatula, and grasp the skin of the ribs among the long ones until below the nipple, and make a straight incision dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white fat, and remove it thoroughly as it is soft enough;
Then pierce the fatty tissue with a large opening, and drain all the fluid, and then put in your sponges, and extend the fatty tissue upwards
and do not touch the breastbone, but only the fatty tissue alone Cope all at once or in pieces itself the cost of him secretly, for if you do not cope it well thoughtfully, it will return to you acute.
and if the evil force leaps towards your work, if you leave it in its place when you have finished the work with the knife;
then gather the two limbs of the shoulder together at a joint, and then cure it as with the other wounds, until it is healed
and if you find the evil corrupted by another illness, then you must consider that you bind the vessels that are suspended in doubt about the decay of blood;
then cope the limb at all the suspension, and extract the evil, and cure it as we have said.
And if acute is assembled in two parts together, its saphes are two branches. if you join the other part as you did the first equally, then dry the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil in the wound.</start_of_turn>
if you join the other part as you did the first equally, then dry the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil in the wound.</start_of_turn> and put away other wool soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two joints, and put under doubled cloths, and bind it up according to this form.</start_of_turn
Then take two cloths, and bind them with coarse wool according to this semblance and join them together at the waist of the breeches, and one of the heads grasps on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the shoulder.</start_of_turn
And the other two heads above the two armpits, and let the whole assembly be restricted in the loop of the braid.
And never is this root of cautery like the size of iron, and take only one cautery with a fine handle, and burn the hair of the armpits, and if it is scorched as we have said, until the white fat that contains the liquid is revealed.
If you take the cautery according to this form, and prick that fat as oncicorns, and burn with this fine cautery:
And do the same in all ways that you can, until you have scorched all
And keep that the fire does not touch the egg
and the wounds that this work is more healing. and blood stains from the works of size.
and if anything opposes you, or abscesses, or bloodstained discharges, or other things, if you can cure what opposes you, according to what is said before
and if the patient is pale and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, if you mix with perforation, as I told you, and you are certain by the significations that we have said that the liquid is calm, then make the patient sit on a low chair then pierce the abscess at the lower part with all the surrounding fat, and put the perforation through to the end of the bone
And let the wound be large enough, so that all the pain may be driven out.
Then put cotton on the limb and bind it, and let the remaining pain be driven out, and cure it until the wound is healed
If the white silk does not prevent the pain from returning to the root of the wound, if you must drink a penny or the instrument with which the pain is treated from the hydropic people, as it is formed before;
And make the wound large, and soak the wound that the pain returns, and reassemble after six months or until it has healed, and when it is reassembled as before, and then the patient will be well again.
Soaking as in the section of this limb has fear of further complications, for it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone
And I shall tell you about the work and the signs of an abscess.
I say therefore that most abscesses come from boils or carbuncles, and that I have seen them myself it is often the case.
That is to say by excessive pressure of sour and watery pus, which is spread by boils or percussion;
and its color is like that of pus from a boil it does not cause pain, but is a serious abscess
and sometimes it is bloody, purulent and full of pus, with a foul color, and never comes from an artery or swelling of a vein.
When it is not from an artery, if known by the position of the postoperative suture, when you press on it at your side; and you must only touch it there.
Whoever causes swelling of a vein is known by the position of its expression at the touch of the sides, and can make it well without making the size greater on this side and on the others and that you must hold it like this for a while, until the blood has risen up and the swelling has gone down, and deliver the suspending part from all parts of the limb
If the limb is already numb with these symptoms, if you must then treat the limb and touch it
If it is open to the surface of the bone, or in what is within the vessels, you must deliver all that is held there, and the socket must be rounded off.
If the cartilage comes loose from its root or behind, if you must clamp it all, and withdraw the yolk, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
When your work is done, if you are using a woolly bandage soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat with other remedies until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
This is an abscess covered with a membrane resembling a bladder, with softening of the bones, and the patient groans when he moves.
And the treatment for this ailment is just as dangerous as the previous one, and all these things we have said about it are valid in this case as well.</start_of_turn>
You must make the patient sit on the edge of the bed, and then support the suspension of the bones below your arms, to all the vessels that are around the edge, and grasp the master and extend them outwards.</start_of_turn
Then hold the palm of the hand against the scraping spur, and pass the vessel through the wound until it is uncovered, and then draw out from the chest. As we said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Then insert a needle or if there is double thread, and tie it to the first part or to the head where the nail has gone, and tie the other end loosely at the other end. Then hold the palm of the hand firmly in the middle directly, according to the length of the bone, and draw out the corrupted moisture
Then treat the wound as usual or apply ointment, so that no vessel is pierced except those which nourish one of the bones
for in this way there is no harm, and if all the vessels are visible, as it should be, then it is enough to draw out the bones from all the vessels. If the veins are not cut through during the incision, and are dried and do not swell, they will not be of any aid.
The outcome of this limb is by the section which comes from above or from the flank, or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, for in this way the intestines descend from that passage to one of the buttocks.
And this passage is either by section or by extension of the bowels, and comes from these two methods of eating which are the cause of these two matters
or by percussion, or by jump, or by pressure, or by lifting of burden, or by similar things;
And the sign that it is an extension of the flank is that there is swelling and swelling, in a long tense, and does not come immediately And it is the abscesses which are equal in size until towards the belly, forasmuch the spleen presses the intestines.
And the sign is when the jaw is fractured, that it causes sudden pain at the start, and the abscesses are diverse in appearance, such as bursting skin and exposed bone, because of the escape of the intestine and the hardness of the jaw.
And never should the limb be moved with the intestine, and is retained when it is held, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed
And in these treatments with fire there is fear, for it is known to escape.
And as for the work if you command or patient that he pull the intestine back into its place in the wound, if it can enter there again. Then hold his collar between your hands, and keep his thighs still;
Then stretch his arm downward, and grasp all the skin of his buttocks long Then keep the liver from the size of a nut according to what you must do to open the wound, and be like that so that it does not swell up again
Then loosen the spleen that is under the skin of the buttocks, until the fatty spleen has become uncovered throughout
Then hold your thumb against the joint that teaches the connection, in that which is between the white tuff which is below the skin of the egg-shell, and between the second tuff, and depart that which is behind the egg-shell, and between the second tuff.
And thus move the hand downwards from the shoulder joint, and when the white tuff is at the top of your left hand, keep the egg-shell against all the tufts towards the size And command the minister to extend the egg-shell upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
And if there is any intestine or white tuff enclosed or hardened, and if you find nothing, if the egg-shell is below the belly
Then take a needle or if there is a thick thread made of X threads, and pass it through the back part of the scapula, which is behind the skin of the shoulder blades. Then the size, then tie off the head of the dislocation that appears from the threads, until there are three threads remaining. Then gather them together in the form of a cross, and bind the scapula, as we have said which is behind the skin of the shoulder blades, with a strong thread of two parts Then encircle the head of the dislocation with the threads, and bind them firmly with two parts, so that no vessels which nourish them can enter there, only the incision which we made. And put the thread straight according to the first thread as long as two fingers, and after these two fingers leave the scapula which is behind the shoulder blades as much as the great toe of the boot And afterwards according to the roundness of the eggshell.
Then they are cut in the part which is below the skin of the testicles, as much as without repair, and they swell, as we have said before
Then mix coarse wool with oil, put in wounds, and bring in the thread that we have mentioned before And never is the bladder cauterized after the incision, out of doubt of the discharge of blood. For this often happens, and let the thread alone until it stops itching for itself
and if it hangs too long, if it is raised by hot water, and put on what we have mentioned, until it stops itching
Then cure the wound of another way, until it is perfectly healed
of a hernia.
In this limb I have never seen anyone who dared to cure with fire.
And the old men say that it is made just like the twig that joins the screw, in part as you tie the blood vessels, after the size above lightly at the bottom.
Then hold me close, and cure the abscess of what causes it, until the blood vessels close;
And cure it as we have said, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Never comes rupture again, as we have said, and open the wounds.</start_of_turn
And do not touch any intestines as bones, and if you do, it is because, and repair them every hour.</start_of_turn
and all the time if it stays too long in this place, if you believe the wound or the swelling, until the intestine comes out.</start_of_turn
And this happens by the stretching of the scapula which is angry, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then it becomes soft and swells the bones open.
And the treatment for this is by cautery, as we have mentioned before
and never is cured by iron in this manner: and that the patient lies lying on his back between your hands, then grasp the limb of the wound inflates with a large amount according to the quantity of three fingers wide
and then pull the scapula which is under the skin that covers it, then take the root and bring the bone out from under the scapula.
and press at the belly, then cut the two bones that appear from the scapula on the top of the root, and cut one and the other
Then draw out the head of the shoulder, and do not cover over the face or stretch out the arm or anything else, as I told you in the treatment of the radix of the intestines. Then treat it with the treatment of wounds.</start_of_turn>
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds.</start_of_turn> And when you have closed the wound, if the pus and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
The shoulder joint is constrained, and shows no outward displacement; the burn is mute in this limb and is more distant from health.
from the softening of the skin of the armpits.
Many times is the skin of the joints softened in households, because the bones that are inside are softened, and it is seen.</start_of_turn
and it is necessary, when one sees it being treated, to make the patient lie on his back, and to stretch the soft skin over the natural skin.</start_of_turn
Then join the two levers at a suture, and if you see it, first close the excess of soft skin at three sutures or four firmly.</start_of_turn
Then hold between the ribs, and cure as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
of great suffering.
Wounds that are scraped off are forbidden in our laws, and for this reason I would not speak of them in this book.
and are necessary only in two ways:
one is that the owner of the wound responds when asked, and in the wound the cure;
and the other is that we often see bestes being scraped off by our assistants, as with pigs and sheep and goats and other beasts.</start_of_turn>
I say therefore that scrapes are done in two ways:</start_of_turn> Or by traction, or by incision.
Or by traction, make them sit in warm water, until the bone becomes softened and limp; Then grasp it with your hand, until it is reset and you can no longer feel it
From the armpit downwards: You must hold it firmly, and press the skin of the bones with your left hand, and then bind the suspension, and grasp each limb at the top, when you have well supported them;
And leave no wound open or secret that is on the vessels;
And this method of traction is milder than that which is done by traction, because in traction it keeps the limb immobile by chance, while this method desires luxation.
Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hairs that are scorched with fire are commanded to the patient to leave them long and even; and if they prick at their root, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Then cure the wound until it is healed. Then cure the wound until it is healed
And the other way is in women, and has on the navel as a rod and two nails.
Then cure the wound until it is healed.
Then cure the wound until it is healed
Then cure the wound until it is healed Then cure the wound until it is healed
Then cure the wound until it is healed
And do not go too far from the wound, for the blood does not come from there; then take care of another remedy until it is healed.
And there is another case where it comes from the root of the marrow, and the swelling, and by chance it leaps up, and this is like the semblance of a wound, and for this reason it is called the old "cowardly disease". If you manage to hold it firmly, as we have said, and cure it until it is healed.
Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the wound is small. and it is natural in childbirth, or an accident from illness that it comes about;
and it is natural in childbirth, or an accident from illness that it comes about; or it is by a wound from a fistula, or a wound from a wound or thick pus, and is made by moisture in the marrow, or in the cost, or in the spleen, or in general;
And thus the conception, and the birth, and by chance the flowers have to have;
and the knowledge of this is through the sight of the dance.
If the swelling is close to the surface, if it is at the shoulder or at the elbow.
If it is slightly painful and near two livers, if you hurry and touch it, it will burst
put your two thumbs together, and the woman should be behind his back, with her legs spread out
then the two livers will appear, as long as the subtle pain is round, and be over the stampings
then take wax, and oil the mole, and put it on the limb, and keep the woman at home beside each joint, if it cannot be sutured.
And if the scapula is hard and thick, it is prudent that you use a sponge resembling a holly leaf.
If the shoulder joint is dislocated from the bone, if it hangs by the tendon and the ball;
If the tendons are ruptured and the ball hangs by the bone, if there are medicines that impede the blood, such as chamomile, dragon's blood, incense, and eggs in abundance;
then apply a broad plaster bandage, so that the wound cannot stick together.
and leave it long, and apply a bandage of dried lint.</start_of_turn>
then take other treatments until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And when the marrow comes swelling, if you cover it according to this manner, it is not abscesses that form.</start_of_turn For the swelling of the marrow, do not touch with fire.</start_of_turn
From hemorrhoids. Hemorrhoids are veins that swell excessively and usually do not recover without treatment, and when they become old they harden.</start_of_turn
And we have said above concerning the signs and symptoms, and I will tell you those which bring about recovery.
I say that hemorrhoids and thrombi, when they are pressed down in the rectum, and are not felt, if not treated by force.
Those which are at the mouth of the rectum, we can feel, are those which we can cure.
Therefore, let her be placed in a cold house, then hold the ankle firmly in place with your hands, and support it at its root, then apply powders of restraining medicines such as chamomile, dragon’s blood, and incense, and similar things.
Then stretch her limb until it reveals an hour, then immerse it in cold water.
And if blood appears, let her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate seeds, meadowsweet and similar things, then drink barley flour, and soak it in honey and oil, and apply it to her back
And if it swells, that is good. If not, if he makes air bubbles at the back and has worms going up towards the wound;
then take lint, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of elderberry with old wine, and make air inside the body.
And when the abscess is healed, if the wound remains open as long as it is healthy;
and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a black head, if you cover it as I have said before and then the wound will heal when it is healthy.
There are many kinds of abscesses that come in the belly, such as carbuncles and pierced abscesses and herpes and worms and tumors and fistula and hemorrhoids and burnt abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the previous division
It is necessary that I say that in this treatment of the cautery abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not like ordinary abscesses that are only painful
And if you see the work of the iron, if the abscess is already formed at the beginning of its coming, and is full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, then you must know it. Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let me measure until the pain is eased;
and then make the patient sit on a seat, and take two small stools or he leans, and support his back and join his limbs together so that the limb is supported;
and spread his thighs, and put his arms down by his knees, and bind them well with a strong bandage
then mix the bail towards the breastbone, and bring the instrument from which we expect the pus to come out; for in this way it will form
And it must be known that when you see it approaching with this instrument, grasp the root first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters between the instrument and the wound does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient. and if the instrument is greater, if you must cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain
and you must put the horn of the instrument at the base, and hold the instrument firmly.
When the wound is opened and the hand is bled, if you must cover the head and the armpit with a cloth, respectively;
When the wound is emptied, if you must put in the wound some soft cotton wads soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil
And put the tension force of the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put by default above the marrow and above the ribcage linen net soaked in water or cooked mallows.
Then cure afterwards two days following this, until it is healed;
and never lift the marrow and the wound with a clamp of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and irises long are cooked Then return to the wound.
And if the wound has been closed in the wound, if you wish, that you take care not to burn it, but cure it as we have said in the division.
From infancy. The master is first at play that he knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down the jaw, and desire odor the er:
then hasten the child to be born immediately. Then he must rejoin the skin that has fallen away with the movement of the fetus, following the natural figure, and this is the issue of the root, and the secondine comes with it.
And when you see these signs, if you must gently press his belly, so that the fetus is thrust out;
because when he descends from his head, the secondine comes with him, and the marrow of his superfluities is broken by a strong bone fracture
and this does not come from any other cause than natural movement.
For it never comes from its bones, but from force of the body, the head or the shoulder, the arms, or it comes from his belly or from the side, and is converted by an accident from his collar and by other harmful figures;
If he is equal to the dance that she is wise and subtle in these matters, and if she warns of error and deception, and I will show her all the figures how one should help her.
If she comes upon his head by natural issue, and the woman groans, and her virtue is weak, if she sits on a chair, or the women hold her;
and she arose her nature of oil or rue, or whatever is fragrant, and then she must dance between her two little toes which are the form of a foot and she must split the second toe, and hold his nail as long as the moisture which is inside corrects the fire;
and she must press the belly of the woman as long as the fetus descends, and if it does not descend, then it must be plastered with the woman's belly with rue mixed with oil of alum;
Then let him grasp and swallow from the stomach, and keep his mouth and nose closed for an hour. If it is now inflamed
And if his hands swell up fiercely, if you must, keep them loosely bound so and so; and if they will not enter, place the woman on a chair and support the feet above; Then pull out the siege from the earth, and hold on to the woman, that she does not pluck at the pulling out;
And if her hands cannot enter, and the child dies, if she bites the hands at the wrist which are placed before, pull out the child, and rest equally.</start_of_turn>
From the issue of the child on his feet. When the child comes upon his feet, if you can push upwards.</start_of_turn Then twist it back and forth, until it is even.</start_of_turn
Then take hold of two pieces and stretch them back and forth.</start_of_turn
Can it jump up to the knees, if the order has grasped, and make it vomit profusely.</start_of_turn If the leap is made, if God wills it.
And if it is not forced as we have said, if the limb hangs too low or too high, as long as it is in accordance with the natural figure. For indeed it is easily done then.
And if it does not come forth as we have seen, say that you take an ointment of alum, sesame oil, gum mastic, and mustard, and grind them all in a mortar.</start_of_turn> and put on the woman's belly and drive out this swelling, then make her sit in hot water until the ribs are cold;
and when she is moistened, give her a compress of myrrh and put on her, and leave her for an hour.</start_of_turn Then make her sit on a chair, then make her vomit and strain her mouth and jaw, and take her pulse gently, for she is now leaping.</start_of_turn>
because of the discharge from the child’s genitals. When the limb comes in this form, if he puts his hands together and together; then either he is bowed down on his neck, and his chin hangs down, and his eyes are shut tight.</start_of_turn> and folds his hands together and together, and then he grasps the hands on his belly, and rests the thumbs against the ribs, until they are all level.</start_of_turn and if the limb does not move, if he takes hold of his limbs and moves them, then he moves the limb upwards, and then he lets go of the hands.</start_of_turn and the child remains thus together and together.</start_of_turn> and instructs the woman to stay close until the child is better.</start_of_turn>
And the child comes out of the womb with a large hand during I command thee to seize the hand: I command thee to seize the hand: if it cannot be repositioned, if thou dost raise up the woman, and alert;
if she cannot be alerted, if thou dost raise up the woman, and alert her, and she does not recover, thou must twist her limb towards the little toe, and pull out her legs forward.
then apply the poultice which I have mentioned before.
and if she does not recover, if thou dost raise her up on the seat, then rest her arm; study to reposition the hand and keep her limb quiet according to natural figures, and make her vomit, and command her to seize until she feels better
From the child’s birth on his neck, and his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother’s back. I command thee that she bends her hand, then twist her thumb back and forth, and she must make her limb light;
And when they are even, if you put on the fleshy nature of height and oil, as we have said, then you must command that it move little by little.
And when you have done this, if you make it sit on its seat, and command that it rest; it will emit. From this same measure to the second degree.
From this same measure to the second degree. When force comes into this manner throughout the second, if you grasp the second with your nail, until the moisture is drained out.
and if it lies flat on its face and on its neck, if you grasp its buttocks, that it should not be retained, and that the boy will die
then take the boy from inside, as we have said, and command the woman not to move again
When the dislocation is slight When it is slightly dislocated, it often happens that three or four dislocations occur together; and this is not an unusual thing, and often happens. For these things are strange, and many die of them
For these things are strange, and many die of them I know that these things are multiplied, and are devoured by the effluvium of the spleen, which is bound to the gut
and never comes out naturally as all the others, as we have said
If it comes out suddenly, as we have said, and the cure is made as we have said, and if the limb is grasped gently, and slight pressure is made of what it does; And make haste as if your life depended on it. Furthermore.
At times they are formed in the marrow of I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more, up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of her noble age, and it is believed that she should dance gracefully, for by chance many things happen to her. If you do as it is commanded.
From childhood death.
When you cure a woman of a dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and there is no great force, and you are compelled to work with your hands; If it is believed that the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or is not about to die
If it is known that the woman is lying on her back, and her arms are clenched at her side, and her legs are lifted;
and the minister should take hold of two parts of her, or she should be bound to the bed if she is not to be treated at the descent of the child.
Then wipe the mouth of the patient with oil moistened with alum and fenugreek seeds and linseed, then anoint his hands with these oils and these poultices
then put them in the belly lightly, then put on the covers or the liniment that are convenient for this, and take care that the child does not descend on his head
if the covers are put on his armpits or on his neck or on his mouth or on his beard or on his chest or on his sides, or if the descending is on the shoulder, he will bite or scratch and have pale cheeks
And it must be held that he grasps the ointment in his right hand, and places the elbow between his two left hands, and holds it all his left hand firmly, and pierces the ointment into neither of these parts which we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
then pierce through another ointment, or the third if you have it there, so that the extraction is equal;
and then hold them equally by moving from one side to the other, so that they are not injured, and hold the ointments taut by hand, as it is the form
And if some remains of it, if one sees a little of its fat there, and holds it in that part, and treats the other part;
If it does not move at all, if you put on this ointment or higher up the limb, do it until it comes out completely.
If one hand comes forward to the other, and it cannot be moved by stretching, you must cover it with a bandage, until it comes out whole. Then support the limb at the wrist or elbow, and so you must do in the other hand, and hold the two feet.
And if the child’s limb is large and is twisted in the exit, or if there is swelling with a collection of blood, you must insert the bony prominence between your thumbs, and hold the swelling and draw out the blood or you can bind it to the instrument which is called the “almidach,” from which the form comes with the instruments or bandage which is after this
And thus make him yield with great force naturally.
Then stretch out the bones as firmly as possible, and if the head of the shoulder leaps out and is strained by force, even if it is fractured, until the moisture that is or has come out comes out.
If it cannot stay in place, if the limb breaks into pieces at the muscle which you hold;
If it is swollen in the belly or deforms the ribs, if you must pierce as much as the moisture comes out.</start_of_turn>
and if the swelling is on its pieces, if the attraction is strong, and the address at the mouth of the marrow is weaker.
If it is twisted in the belly or the arm, if you must pull it out from under the covering that is around the limb.</start_of_turn> And make the belly or the arm until the moisture that is in it comes out.</start_of_turn
And if another limb is affected with stiffness, and the head of the shoulder remains dislocated, if you pull his hand downwards by grasping the wrist, and stretch it out to the mouth of the socket. Then I oil or two, and stretch it out forcefully.
And if the socket of the wrist is retracted by the surrounding inflammation, if I cannot pass my finger, I must bring moisture and fat things to it and bring on ointment, and soak in warm and moist things.
If the shoulder hangs on its costal cartilage, and you put it back even, if you bring about what we have said in the living child;
and if it does not yield, if you must force it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second
And when you have done this, if what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh,
And when you have done this, if what we have said above comes to pass in the marsh, and blood flows freely, if there is any other cure, restrain the flow of blood and bring about other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose belly had two fetuses inside, one died and the other remained. After a long time, there came a swelling in the belly, and it burst open, and began to swell greatly
I went for help, and for a long time I thought, and could not stop the wound.
I put on strong dressing, and out came a bone, and after a while another. I marvel indeed, for in this belly there is no bone.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I wish the wound, and in treating bone as well, as long as the woman is in a better state. and she rests long and steadily without pain, which is almost like having no wound at all
and I have never known this chapter except for the time when the master found a strange thing and had to provide aid
After that comes the shape of pressure, as we have said in the books.
And at the second turn, two turns as two heads of two limbs. However, the ear should be more obtuse than the restriction, and be made of ivory or horn;
and the mouth should be one thumb wide, and the edge of the teeth should be long one and a half fingers long; and between the two limbs should be two staples of the same size, which should be fixed in one and the other, half a finger or more long;
and these two staples are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when the two ears are turned
Another form, more obtuse and lighter in shape, is made of ivory or horn, according to the shape of the teeth And he has two shoulders and two elbows, as you see, of a long palm, and two must be wide.
And when you see the marrow opened with all the instruments, if you make the woman sit down to the left, keep the pieces still and the legs over, then rejoin the two elbows together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instruments between her thighs Then move your hand over the instruments, if you have held them equally, according to the quantity that you see the marrow open, until it bites what it wants
These instruments are all dirty, and are multiplied by their resemblance; And when you see them appear, the more haste there is to work, and the more high is your home for their quantity
If one does not despair of the instrument when it does not appear, for its necessity is not easily excused
When the second toe is retained at birth, if you command the patient to retain its claw, and then make her expel it with force, and strain your hands to her mouth and nose; and if it breaks through for that, well done.</start_of_turn>
If not, take I pot [a vessel] and make I hole or cut, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the mare, like chamomile, rue, anis, camomile, cassia and centaury.</start_of_turn All these herbs, or some of them, be boiled or steeped in water over the fire.</start_of_turn
then put a caustic or burn hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and hold it tight until steam comes out of the mare.</start_of_turn
Then let the patient spit out the fire, as we have said. If the second joint is seized with pain.
Then if it remains after this treatment and is not forced out, as the physician commands, let the patient rub her left hand with olive oil or balsam of alum, and then remove it from the wound, and do the same with the second one. When you have found it, grasp it and stretch it both ways, so that the mark does not leave the wound during extraction
but must move slightly to the right and left, and then pull out the fire. If it comes out and dries out.
And if there is much blood in the wound, as we have said, let the patient spit out the fire, and fumigate with herbs
And if it is not of all that we have said, if you keep silent, you will not be punished for it.
But it must be that what is in the mouth of the mare, that you bind to the hip of the woman, and then put the clitoris in order with four medicines. If she sobs and returns, and comes out strong;
But all the same, when she comes out like this, if there is a bad smell in the stomach and the head, and she cries out, the patient is cured.</start_of_turn> If it is necessary, then suitable fumigations must be given for this.</start_of_turn>
None of the ancients have proved fumigation with rosemary and dried figs.</start_of_turn
The form of the instrument in which we fumigate the woman is to retain the flowers and secondine if it is this:
And it is seen like a wasp, and one puts on the head in the middle, and the large head above the fire.
or the fumes above the charcoal, and the stench until it is consumed, and starts another.
Many children are born who do not have the solid foundation perceptible, for it is often stifled by a subtle syfac if you must compel her to break through that syfac at its root, and do not pierce with an acute spur, and keep the wound untouched
then put on soft linen soaked in wine and oil, and then cover with ointment until it is healed.
If you doubt that it will stay in place, put or draw a weight on it, and hold the hands still, and let the limb rest until the pain subsides.
And never comes this stamping from the swelling of wounds or abscesses; If it is necessary to cover that support: If it is necessary to cover that support: if it be cured, as we have said of the plaster.
Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodules, and large ones that arise from below the foundation depart, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or several.
and when that nodule is old, if it be renewed, and has moisture with white or yellow bile, and never are these fistulas healed
and are known by this that it is accompanied by vomiting or diarrhea when the patient vomits, and by an upset stomach when they vomit once
and if there are fistulas that reach the bladder, and reach half of the belly; And arrive at the hip joint, and up to the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula persisting at the foundation, and does not move: And that you bite your thumb or foundation, and there is a thin needle of spider or iron in the fistula when there is no swelling
And if there is swelling, if you see a slight attempt of swelling, or a wound from a horse, as long as you feel the attempt or the wound on your thumb;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no vomiting or diarrhea, no wind or pain, as we have said the wound does not pierce me. If you hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula persists up to the bladder or the urinary tract, if in a leap the urine escapes, and cannot be retained by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the shoulder, if it is attempted coming down to the root; If there is no twisting and the pain is not severe, if it is simply displaced, and does not deserve medicine or support by pressure.
And in such fistula of the Persians there is no remedy except toil, and the vanity of the fools who intervene in it.
In that which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of health with fire, as I have shown, and that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and the limbs are placed under his armpits, and his shoulders are bent towards his belly. Then attempt an embrace, or a plunge if there is torsion, until you feel the bone or the attempt comes.
If the patient feels the bone is twisted at the root, if you believe that you must bite down on your thumb index, if you feel that the attempt has perceived it;
Or be pulled out or if you feel between your thumb and the little finger the cartilage or the bone, then grasp that it is pierced through; If it does not slip out by itself, we cannot heal it.
We can only heal them well when we can keep them still
and the pain that comes from it, if we remove the burn using the cautery instrument as we have said before.</start_of_turn> And the rope should be tied at the top of the fistula, as long as it comes from below the foundation. And do it twice or thrice, until you are sure that these charoses that are like an oil brush have been burned
And then treat with soft compresses of burrs until the char is loosened, and then treat with ointment rubbing charcoal and soldering
If he is unscathed, that is well.
If so, nothing else can make it well
and if you try it between and do not reach the root that is or the foundation, and between your thumb and the attempt put on a thick covering of charcoal or gutta, and you will see the fistula at that which sustains the covering like a cord If the head of the fistula approaches the attempt beforehand, and the cautery follows afterwards, as long as it arrives before the head of the attempt. and the attempt will be delivered, and will be cured.
then confirm those parts that seem like a feather of oil, and nothing remains of them
And if he does not move from you, and stands between you and the work, if you cauterize with fire or medicine at its peak.
For the fire cautery joins two bones together: namely, the burning of these hairs together, and the incision of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the healing of soft tissues buried under the skin or split open, until the flesh bursts open, and the hair is burned in the burst
Then cure the wound of the oozing boils with charcoal powder, and these are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, if it is sound and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the root of the bone, and is pushed out of place, if its bone or root is fractured, inquire about that.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the attempt, and between two there is the cloth or the leech or burn, or it is near to bursting, if there is no other way but the way of escape and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize as we have said, or you press just until it bursts, or if you wish so, put a poultice and cure as before.
and do not go too much into the wound, that you do not cover the foundation that holds the bottom, and bring out the discharge in the natural way Then cure as we have said
Then cure as we have said By chance, if he is sane, or you loosen that covering and the mucus then when it is cut from its root, or by attempt or by some other pointed instrument; then you must cut off that which is superfluous in the wound, as much as you wish.</start_of_turn> then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula at the lower part of the root.</start_of_turn>
then study to restore the wound and to stop the fistula at the lower part of the root.</start_of_turn> if there is something more serious with the patient.</start_of_turn
And never are fistulas according to this manner.</start_of_turn and it is when you bite the attempt in the fistula, and it is either costs the foundation from the skin under, or take an attempt pierced at the head according to this form:</start_of_turn And there is always a thread torn in two, and you must hold the attempt at the very end of the fistula until it is at the head.
If the person is lying on the margin of the ground, then grasp the hair of that limb, so that you bite down on the root;
If the person is lying on the margin of the ground, then grasp the hair of that limb, so that you bite down on the root, and pull out the head of the hair, and reunite the two hairs together, and stretch one against the other, and leave it one hand or two;
and do not relax until the hair has overcome these hooks that are between the root and the tip.
Then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not perforate, if you force it to perforate in every way you can, it will not be too much harm. For it is not proper to make the wound wider by force, and then to cure it, as we have said, while it is still healthy.</start_of_turn>
The shape of the spiny bladder from which the fistula is made if it is moist and soft from one part and trenchant; and on the other hand not, for if you see this you must not do it
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: Or else they are deep within the foundation, like grains of resin; and if there are small and large ones, and in their proper order without blood, and if there is one or more, and they are loosened from the foundation and from the head of the foundation.
But those which are loosened have some moisture, and are covered with blood or a yellow-orange liquid or blood, and have the color of flesh
and the cure for those which are within the foundation is that you command the patient to gasp and breathe out, until the foundation is forced out, and they will appear whole. if you are in a hurry, and you have grasped it with your nails, or you hold it with your finger, then break it at its roots
And if the cord that holds them together does not hold them firm by their moisture, if you grasp them with a drape or a bandage, or with a piece of chamæleon; and pull them down, then press them, and powder over them warm powders which shall replace the cautery. or you burn them if it is said or as the physician of cautery commands, because the cure of other cures is when they are well;
and if the foundations cannot be plastered, if you bite the patient with a biting and rough plaster to uncover what is under, if it can be plastered open cannot the patient be put together, and if the strings are strong for the foundations, if it is a slight cure
cannot the patient be put together, and if the strings are strong for the foundations, if it is a slight cure And it is that you grasp them at your nail or with pliers, and press, and then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and that they fear the incision with the knife. If you can manage the suture according to this method:
If you can manage the suture according to this method: I take a thread and pass it through a needle, and then pass the thread through the underside and make the needle pierce through again, and I twist the two ends of the thread around the needle, and if it is thick enough
and tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so to all the others, and leave one to secure the excess blood;
then put on the foundation a soft dressing in rose oil or beeswax, and put on the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
And then you leave them until they bleed, and when they have bled, if the treatment for swelling and other treatment, while they are sane.
When the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die If you believe that you have reached the point of a spasm or a nail at the nail edge, which does not leave it moist; then you must treat it until it is healed if you believe it is necessary;
and if it cannot be cured, if you must renew the scraping more forcefully than before, until it is bleeding, and be scraped off; then you must treat it until it is sane.</start_of_turn>
When the physician hears the patient groaning. Formice is a small appearance that is forced before the body, and will bleed out by itself.</start_of_turn
And never does the pain leave him, but it feels as if he is dead with fear, and comes throughout the body, and more than in any other part.
And the cure is that you take a bundle of rue heliotrope, or a bundle of rue viper, and put that salve on the wound, until it circles the wound all around.</start_of_turn> Then turn your hand all around the bundle until you cover it all around the wound, and put it in its proper place, and pull out the wound from its roots.</start_of_turn
If you see that he does it with a spider's thread or iron in this fashion, be subtle and withdraw your hand. Do not be afraid, for it is necessary to hold firmly and press.</start_of_turn
And if you see that the wound must be cauterized, if it is before or during the cautery.</start_of_turn
Never make a blister of silver or coin, or of gold that has melted or is soft;
Never make a blister of silver or coin, or of gold that has melted or is soft, and never make a blister of these small and large things, according to the way in which they are brought about. Those who are feeble and painful in the treatment of children are small.
Those who are feeble and painful in the treatment of children are small. Their form is small and great if it is excessive; or the belly is bound up in this manner:
and if there is a swelling or the belly is tied up, if you see it, and if you touch it either with your hand or with your finger
and if there is a hole in one rib and in the other I
and if the belly or one puts medicines in a bladder of fine leather or parchment, and if you pierce all around the large hole, and between each hole put one must of space, and then put in these holes one strong thread of strong thread twisted in the shape of an X or around it, and reassemble the belly as if it were a nail And when the treatment is complete, if the thread has been placed in front of a strong needle, then clip it off.
And this is the shape of a circle:
And let the treatment neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the blister with oil or balm of egg, or something similar, and then cover it lightly Then grasp the minister with both hands together, until it is quite visible, then remove the blister, and let the patient rest his legs at the surface, and if the medicine wishes, it should suffice as long as the thread can stay in its place And if it sleeps all night, there is greater aid
And if you see him lying in sickness with a swelling of the belly, and the physician hastens to leave, if he resumes as soon as he is well.</start_of_turn>
And if it swells up on the skin or foundation, or abscess, if the blister is as fine as for a child
And this is the shape of a subtle blister on which the skin is strained:
We have already said in the previous chapter the treatment of wounds.
or you will say the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on what causes them, and depending on the limbs or wounds that are made, and how they are made
The things which are done for wounds are done by cutting stone, and the size of spear, nail, lance or fist, or stone or similar things;
or that are done according to the rules of the body, as when there is a wound on the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, or similar parts
and I will tell you the treatment for a chest wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come to you in this chapter
I say that when a simple wound comes or a fracture occurs, and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is not from a stone or similar things, and the skin is thoroughly ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the abscess is hot: if you do so soon as the head of the skull itself comes from the wound, or if the blood comes from the part furthest from the wound;
and you will hear the patient's pulse full of wine and meat.
and if he does not recover, if he vomits blood or does not drink wine, does not eat meat;
and draw out the wound, if an abscess comes, cover it with soft wool soaked in rose oil only, or in astringent wine.
If there is no surrounding tissue around the wound, put the wound on the fresh blood, which is not moved by air, dust, or anything else; I will tell you about this later.
If the blood has moved, put on some sponges until it is whole.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is great like the size of a spear and similar, and the limbs do not naturally unite, if you unite them with sutures, as I will say, for wounds of the belly, with sutures.</start_of_turn
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and is gaping, and only held by a thread, if the surgeon sees it.</start_of_turn Then cure the wound with medicine, and restore the flesh hard instead of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and bread, as well as poultry, and the like.</start_of_turn
And if you find or leather spoiled, and there is no bone, if the surgeon sees it, pull out all the decay and throw it away, then cure it.</start_of_turn
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without support, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, if the artery is torn, and if you find it displaced, bind it with a thread. And if that does not help, if you must cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is gentle: and put on this powder that will harden as soon as it touches the air
The powder is to be applied in the form of a paste take incense in one part; blood of a dragon two parts; live charcoal three parts, and the powdered [substance], and apply to the wound, and hold firmly, until it contracts well and unites with all its blood.
and then bind it firmly, and let it loosen, if it does not swell for one must not administer the medicine until it is healed.
And never shall one do this treatment alone, when there is neither incense nor blood of a dragon, but only when the wound has not moved.
and if the wound has moved, even in this state, if one does not put on this powder;
but put on some unguents that digest, or poulps of flour of barley made of water and honey, until it boils over then treat it with other treatments until it is healed
And if a break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, if the bone is extracted with fine needles;
And I will tell you of this later.
of the wound of the neck.
If there is no difference between the fracture of the head and the fracture of the neck, but if the neck or the artery is cut
If it is bone marrow, if there is no other remedy except to leave the wound open, and do not put anything restrictive, because it hinders the marrow and makes it recede. Do not put anything rough on the wound, for the substance of the marrow is cold, and the continuation of the pain is with the brain, which is the most tender member
But if the medicine be soft, like warm water in sweet oil, and mixed with rosemary oil, and vinegar washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this method, and moist compresses.
And if the wound is large, if the blood vessel and the nerves are torn, then cure as long as it is healthy.
And if the wounds are deep and closed and full of pus, if the hole is high or more towards the base;
If the artery is severed and blood flows profusely, if the swelling and the wound, and the cautery are mixed together, then.
If the spine of the shoulder is severed, or the scapula, and the bone is held, so that the meat is not damaged, if the scapula is above the glenoid fossa, do not touch the shoulder but reset it to its natural position. Then strain the wound immediately, and leave it alone for a while, then treat it with ointment until it is healed;
And if the wound has made an imprint in the bone, if the marrow; If there are pieces of bone, if the wounds are severe throughout, if these you cannot have, if you leave them as they are, let them burst open and align the issue.
If the wound is fresh, if powder is applied as I have said.</start_of_turn> And if there is bone in the wound and there is fistula, if the wound must be closed as I have said in this chapter.</start_of_turn>
If it is from a spear or a knife, and the wound is deep, look if the wound is surrounded by swelling so that the patient cannot align their limb.</start_of_turn> Then let the wound be mortal.</start_of_turn
And if it is not deep and is fresh throughout, do not put anything on it for the first hour, do not bind it up with the dressing until it is painful and bursting, return to the body and comfort the patient.</start_of_turn But I put an attractive weight upon it, and I bind it twice over.
And if there is no weight, put on the wound a great quantity of cotton to absorb the moisture, and let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more If there is no spasm, do not cause the body to tremble excessively or excessive straining of the limbs When you see the bones in their place, consider the wound to be healed Treat the wound and other cures, as long as it is healthy
And if it does not heal, and there is pus, consider that there is a fistula
If the treatment must be so. If the wound is a cut or incision of a spear or knife, and it is simple or deep, or at the back, if the treatment of what is before [is insufficient]; then it requires stitching
and if it is small, powder is sufficient, and if it is embedded in the bone, and if pieces break off, if there is pain in the wound, and the surrounding area is blackened; if they are not blackened, let the wound rest, if it aligns the extractions
and for other wounds, as for other limbs, it is the judge’s decision as we have said
indeed
The pain of the belly is great, medium, and small.
The great wound of the belly never stops bleeding, or the nerves of the intestines are cut, because of the admission of blood.
The wound is more painful, and never worth more than the small wound, because of this we must return the intestines to their place immediately, if we do not return them bit by bit;
because they swell so much that they feel the pain, if we return them bit by bit, it is worth less than the greater wound, because in this way we leave the intestines in their place along with the others two times
And the swelling of the belly is according to three methods:
The two common sutures are in the belly suture and the other wound in the flesh and two other proper sutures are common as other wounds.
And indeed, they are more proper with the belly suture, and I will say a little bit and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small and there is nothing of the intestines inside, and if there is anything, it is by one of these two methods: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the fruit.
And when it is cold, freeze it partly in this way: wet a sponge or lay a cloth in cold water only, or you will burn in cold water stinging and pricking and spiking, and elevate the intestine until the swelling is bony;
And never again did I make this wine restraining, for it is mute that it stirs the soul to burst.
When you see the swelling depart, if the gut of water or the belly is high and bloated, for by this is the entrance to things aligned
If it cannot enter, if there is a wound there, with the instrument we hold the swellings still
The first cure is to make it mute that the size does not require great necessity or that there be no need;
And this is the instrument for cutting
If you trench downwards in the shoulder and do not withdraw, and once this is done, the form: And when the wound is swollen, and the intestines protrude outwards, if you stop bleeding in accordance with the natural form in its place, know that you have done well, for this is enough.
When the wound is large and is in the lower part of the belly, if you must manage the patient on his back, raise his legs above his head. If it is in the lower part of the belly, put the head and arm higher than the lower parts, and if the wound is in the lower part of the belly, if it is in one of the two lower parts, put your hand over that which is higher than the other
and so it is necessary to support what I say in large and gaping wounds.
Small wounds put what appears to be holding, then put your hands between the wounds and support the wound with your hands, and close the wound
This is the common method of stitching, and take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound’s size, then leave the head of the wound at a distance, and pierce with a needle or there is strong thread. And pierce the two armpits with the two fingers of the siphac, which is to say the skin of the armpits, until you have pierced to that part; and reunite the two fingers of the siphac with the three fingers together.
Then strain with a double thread around the needle of two parts, and reunite the two fingers of the wound immediately, and then leave one space, and pierce another hole.</start_of_turn>
Then tie the thread like the first needle, and do not stop doing so until you have finished piercing according to what you have learned from the needles, until the wound is restricted.</start_of_turn
And let the needles be neither too fine nor too thick, for the fine needles will not grasp the flesh, and the thick ones will not enter well.</start_of_turn> For this reason, it is recommended that they be blunt;
and it is not recommended to press the needles too far into the flesh and skin, as they may break and open the wound before the suture is complete.</start_of_turn>
and then keep the head of the needles still, so that they do not irritate the patient at night, and put on tension or a bandage on the head of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them in until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
and this way of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, because there is only one or two needles involved.</start_of_turn>
The second suture is common, and is that you join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the substance together with a needle or there is one strong middle thread.</start_of_turn
And when you have perceived these things altogether, if you rejoin the needle at the place where you began, in the manner in which it is customary to close the edges;
and put some space between each stitch the thickness of a barleycorn.
This stitch should be made on the flesh, and I sew a wound which has been caused by a knife, which is greater than a palm of the hand, and it is in the belly.
I shall bring back the intestine when it has been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound has healed for fifteen days; then I shall cure it, and it will be healed.
And the blood spurted from the wound as if it would die, and this was a miracle.
and I did not care for it, because I was in the wilderness where there was no healing, no medicines of any kind; And the method more effective for the wound is to apply a compress twice a day, and to wash it with honey water until it is healed.
Or thus I shall tell you two ways to suture:
Take the needle and pass it from the underside of the edge just as far as necessary to reach the underside;
When it has grasped the edge on the right, if there is a slip or the needle has pierced, and you have passed the needle through from the underside of the edge just as far as necessary to reach the underside again;
And the understanding of this suture is that you should stitch as a tailor does the leather, and that you leave once the slip has passed from one side, and you take it back from the other, until the suture is complete
The second method of stitching, which Galiens does indeed know well, if it is so with any, that joins the two parts together naturally, and leans one chief against the other chief, in part manner:
He sews on a hook or chief near the edge, and makes the latter pass only through the latter, and leaves the two chiefs of the spic; then he turns the hook, and makes him pass through from the back until he reaches this far side, as two chiefs of spic.
and makes him pass through one and the other from the back until he reaches this far side, in two other hooks that are on the other side
and that is the quiet method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens if this word is false, and no one testifies, we must suture the belly with two needles, or there must be thread in the seam.
and we must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who suture wounds
and the stitches must be strong enough so that when the wound is opened again the belly does not burst more than usual.
The judge of the wound is like the judge of other wounds:
and if you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if it has moved, you must stop the bleeding and the pain
then apply powder to the wound and if it has moved, do not put any dressing that is present, until the wound is closed And the hair grows, and the scabs are soldered, and the mark is seen. Then cure the wound like the others, as long as it is healthy;
and if you have no medicine, if you put it on, as long as it begins to swell, cotton wool, and move twice the juice as long as it is healthy
For you must not have any other medicine except in simple wounds
and if you doubt that the wound will not heal properly, cover the principal parts with coarse linen soaked in warm oil of thyme or rose oil, and put it between the edges, and drain the abscesses
and if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it happens many times, if you immerse in clusters of black wine it will help, and the same if the putrefaction comes up to the intestines;
And the large intestines, their masses more readily cured than the small intestines.
The intestines which are called "jeuns" cannot recover when they are swollen, because of the swelling of the veins, and for the subtlety of all the body, and for the proximity of their nature to nerves.
If the spleen bursts from the wound, if it is returned backwards just like the intestine while it is still fresh.
And if it is black and becomes towards black or white, if you must know that you must bind the black part, because there are veins and arteries there;
Then hold that which is between the ribs, and put the two thumbs hanging down from the part under the wound until they are withdrawn to align the extraction when the spleen bursts, and the wound is closed
Of the root of the boil.
When the intestine is round and the wound is small, if you can restore it in small pieces, because I know that one has been grazed by a spear or the belly of a lance;
And it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and it became filled and turned into an fistula, and in this there was vomiting and flatulence.
I put it to cure as I could, and did not cease to support it until it was healed, and the wound closed.</start_of_turn>
And when I saw it closed, I doubted that the patient would be well in his belly.</start_of_turn and there was no longer any pain, but only in better conditions, and food and drink.</start_of_turn
and the physicians say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be ligated in parts.</start_of_turn take forceps of great size, and gather the edges of the wound, and when the forceps have gone over the opening, if you put on the two fingers, if it bites its lip above.</start_of_turn
Then he grasps the head, and if it does not slip away, put in another support afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely healed. and heals the wound.
If the head of the intestines is burnt, and there is no further discomfort for the patient, and it can be tied up with a fine thread which is cut from the intestines themselves, in part like this:
take hold of this thread of intestine that is already discharged, and then tie at the head of this thread a thread of fine linen twisted, and then pass the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and hold it in place.</start_of_turn>
and this way of stitching is not strong except according to the way of engaging and hoping;
And if the wound is large and wide, even if it is in one of the great intestines, if there is no swelling or contamination, it is only due to its slightness.
Of fistula or that it be Wounds and abscesses, when they swell, if they are called universally 'fistules,' and even when they are sewn and rent bowe.
A fistula is confirmed by a hard and white nodulation, and there is no pain, and is just like the foot of a bird;
never in clear water, but sometimes thick; never too little, but sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not sanitized, and there is pus, is only fierce from one of the seven causes: that is to say, by the small amount of blood or pus; or for its malice; or for its malice; or because there is great hardness within and on the limbs, that they do not allow new hair to grow. or there is too much tension; or the limb is twisted, and the matter is of poor quality or the treatment is not good for the cure or because corruption is like a plague or because in that area property is late for digestion, and late for health, and escapes by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already mentioned these causes, signs, and treatments in the division.
Or you must know that I will tell you the cure of fistula which is made by an egg of hands.
Wounds that have become fistulated appear in all limbs with pain. For there are fistulas that arise from great veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, intestines, bladder, or some bones, or the spin of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if in part it comes from the primary limb, and similar things happen.
And all these fistulas of this kind are bad for healing, and there is only toil and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not go beyond what I have said, and you have promised a cure, and you see it is known, if you take an attempt to drain or burn it, if the fistula is straight, if not;
If the fistula is tortuous, if the hook of a slender needle attempts to plunge, for the swelling swells inward towards the curvature;
If the fistula has holes and you do not secure it well with hooks, if the swelling bursts through one of the holes, for the moisture is too strong from one hole to another, and it deflates.
Then if the limb is hanging limply from your hand, that you know if there is bone or nerve damage, and that it is swollen, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where it hurts
and when you know truly where it is, if it is far from a joint or nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the bones that I have mentioned, if you have accepted what I have said, and if the fracture is displaced and the corrupt parts that are within
And then the treatment must be continued until it is healed; and if the fistula is well formed from the outset, if you can, close it from the start, just as you would do with a wound; then put in some soft patches in medicine, and leave them until the medicine consumes the superfluous matter that is remaining at the bottom.
And then put in absorbent dressings to keep it dry until it is healed;
And if it is not healed by that, if the burn it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, if it is closed
If the vein or nerve does not swell or the main parts do not ache, as we have said
And if the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackness, if the limb is lame as long as the corruption is all bone, then treat with absorbent dressings until it is healed.
If he is not sane, and returns bowed as before, take hold of his hair that you may not let him go until he is well.
if he pulls and wants as long as you stay at the bottom, and breaks through all the corruption, then restore the limb.</start_of_turn>
and if he is already sane, that is good.</start_of_turn> If not, take hold of his hair that you may not let him go until the corruption is gone.</start_of_turn if there is nothing else to do but to leave it to its natural course.</start_of_turn
and if there is a slight fracture of a bone, and you must treat it with pliers, if you extract it with a suitable instrument, and if there is a major fracture, do not leave it untouched.</start_of_turn
If moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, grasp firmly and moisten and stretch, and deliver the bones.
If you do not remove them at once, if you put on the wound something that causes putrefaction, and leave them until the bones become soft within the bones, then indeed they will become lighter.
And if it is a large bone, such as a limb or thigh, if you remove the corruption as much as possible until the black is entirely bony, then restore the wound.
And if there is a great part of corruption, and comes up to the bone’s marrow; then cover with cloth and cover all until the corruption is gone, and then cure until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take note and help in your work.
There was once a young man about XXX years of age who had a pain in his leg caused by something within the body, until the matter came out through a large abscess; there was no known cause for opening it.</start_of_turn>
but he became mad with worry about the abscess opening up so much that he bled profusely from the matter coming out, and it became a fistula, and there came out much pus that flowed over the body and moistened the wound.</start_of_turn
and he remained mad for two years, and there was no skill in his hands, as far as I know, until I was called away, and saw his leg and the medicines that were being used, and what cured him of the fistula.</start_of_turn And became red the colour of youth, and had the colour of citrine.
I bound a loop in one of these holes, and then circled around all the holes, and found that one followed the other throughout all the parts of the limb.
And I found myself in such a plight, that I grasped one of the holes as long as I discovered part of the bone, which I found corrupted and putrefying, and the stench of corruption reached as far as the marrow inside;
I thought that what appeared to me was a corrupted bone, and I cared for nothing else but this;
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but I could not make it stay put
and then I found the bone just as before, and I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I thought I had cured it, and then I fainted, and I regretted that I had not made the limb stay put But I cannot do more than I can bear with the palm of my hand on the bone, and I must force it out completely, then restore it with medicine. And he was healed and comforted greatly, and did not wish to continue the work for fear of the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death which I avoided for him. For often is blood evacuated with the opening of a vein, but it was entirely sound, and in place of the bone there grew a hard scale, and it was in good condition and suffered neither pain nor disadvantage of any kind, neither from the fear nor from the coming.
And if the bone is broken in no place of the body, if you can manage it, do so in this manner: Take hold of it, and strain at the head of the bone that is broken, and command that no one extend it upwards; And put another layer of linen more thick than the first layer, and bind it on the edge which is above the bone, and extend the head, so that you force out the corrupt marrow from the bottom, and uncover the bone above the place where you see it is being bound, so that the bone is not bruised by the linen
And put I a sponge or a bowl of salt on the bone to cover the decaying flesh.
And keep it so moist so that one can see and feel the decay, and moist it again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the decay is in the middle or in a part, if you uncover the flesh entirely;
then put I a sponge or a bowl of salt, and then cover the decay from one side to the other with the sponge, and keep it covered for as long as the decay lasts, as we have said
and if the decay is in the joint, if you join the corrupted joint, and cover the bone on the other side;
And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, if there is no other angle but that of the nail;
And if the corruption is blunt at the end of the hand or the wrist, if the nail is strong in that place, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corrosion, how it happened to you. Keep silent in every way, but do not let the vein or nerve hinder you.
And the nails which cut and the threads which cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of swellings, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness Therefore it is necessary to show some resemblance of the work of the instrument
and towels that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases. if you think the instrument of which you have need according to this, as it is fitting.
The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, or by pressure, or by force;
and when you have treated that decay by the means of medicines, and it does no good, if you can cover that limb until the decay goes away, or the disease escapes by that, for the patient either escapes by death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the defect of the limb
and the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and appears after the blackness, for that decay of the limb spreads throughout the limb and consumes it entirely
If you are in a hurry and it is by the percussion of venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar, if the corrosion is at the root of the tooth, if you bite and do not give it space to come until the hand.
If it comes until the hand, if the bite has reached the joint, if the corrosion does not reach the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if the bite is on the nail;
and if it passes the nail, it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue.
and thus do all things when the corrosion comes or the tooth is broken if it comes in the first joint, if the bite follows the other joint;
And if it comes or if it is pressed, if you seize all the hair; And if it comes or if it is pressed, if you seize all the hair; and if it comes up in the limb, if you grasp at the joint of the armpit.
And if it comes from below the armpit, if there is no other remedy but to leave the patient dead;
and you must grasp the member below and above, and extend one minister of the lower limb and another minister of the upper limb, and you must saw the flesh between the two limbs at a wide space, until the bone is exposed.
Then grasp the bone or the skin, and put some lint between the drape and the limb, so that the skin does not touch the sound limb, and bring to the patient other lesions and incisions
And if blood flows when you work, if you cauterize the limb too much, or if you apply some restraining powders;
then return to your medicine until it is accompanied, and then bind the limb firmly with a strong thread, and cure it while it is whole.</start_of_turn>
and I will tell you that I have seen at home in this matter.</start_of_turn>
there was a blackness that seemed to burn like fire, and that corruption began at its root in the bone, so that it consumed the whole limb.</start_of_turn
and when we saw the corruption, if we covered the limb and it was healed;
and long after it returned the corruption or the bone of the hand, and I came to it, and I put on things that rebound after the purification of the ulcer, and I could not stop the corruption.</start_of_turn
And he says that I should grasp his hand, and I will not, for I avoid all hope of recovering the matter. I also doubt that if I cut off his hand, he will not die, for the virtue of the man was weak.
And he awoke entirely, returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed
I have heard of this case only because of the other things we have seen in this matter
Never comes abscess in flesh without making great swelling. And then bursts and breaks, and in leaping the swelling comes out, and leaves the wound open as if it were a vessel And the skin that lies below is just as flexible as draped fabrics, and does not adhere to bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "sain", and is not called "fistula".
but if it is stretched too far as to reach the bone, it is called "fistula".
and the skin if it is tightly stretched over this skin and the same when it is flexible, is like a draped fabric and does not adhere to its corruption.
And if you suspect that the skin has become loose and the corruption is not in the bone, and the skin is thick like leather, it is like a fistula
Look if the wound is large, and if the foul odor comes from it, then clusterize the Egyptian medicine which is made like this. Take oil, and herbs, and beeswax, equally, and mix them up in a vessel over a fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
And then take according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and clusterize the wound, and restrain the opening. And leave the medicine on for two hours, then take it out by squeezing it out
Do this several times, until the wound is healed, and the pain is gone.
And never clusterize with vinegar, when this medicine is not present, and only take vinegar of must of grapes, and pour out water, then drain, and clusterize, until you are sure that the wound is well healed.
And if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine with its unguents, if he be immersed in water and honey or there be a little piece of butter floating; or you immerse it in honey and wine, which has the property of softening and washing out, and the wine makes the blood circulate.
When you have done this, and you have confirmed that the flesh is well softened, if you immerse it in that which causes the char to grow, and you take plaster to bind it with, and do it with rosemary oil and wine.
or you immerse it in some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken concerning their properties or treat wounds with ointments.
If the nail of the thumb is pierced, and the flesh around the nail does not enter, if a nail has become loose, put in an attempt of Egyptian resin, or beeswax, as much as it is enlarged.
If the wound is too wide, if the thumb and index finger leave such space that the nail can enter, and if the nail has pierced too deeply, if the pulp has gone below the nail, if the nail is higher than the skin below.
and if you do not cover the nail end if you see, if it appears in such a manner that the nail goes below the lowest level, for when the nail is deeply pierced, if it does not leave enough space to grasp the hair and if you do not cover the nail end if you see, if it appears in part in this way Que le bois corrigé légèrement vitale, et ne laisse rien du bois.
Que le bois corrigé légèrement vitale, et ne laisse rien du bois. And take consolidating medicines to bring the blood back to its normal state, and keep covered with a linen drape that covers the whole body Then press forces inwards where the wound is greatest, for it is usually hung over on the other side by the amount of the wound, and put it on the wound so as to align the limb, and do not remove the great drape until after making sure that the wound is finally healed once
and that which is outside the wound often helps to close the wound, and its discharge that comes from the wound, if it is venom or pus or enough, or digested or indigestible
And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not, and when your medicine has been partly absorbed and you see the nature of the wound that comes out of the wound, if there is pus that the veins have already clotted, and approach health;
Then take off the dressing in the morning, or the third day, and when you remove the dressing, if you change another bandage, renew the packing.
And if subtle poison comes after a long tension, if you do not rouse me from my sickness, for your sickness is approaching.
For there are some people who delay the healing of wounds by keeping cloth on them, and those who do the opposite;
and if after remaining quiet for a while after an injury, the wound does not seem to be healing properly;
and if the wound becomes dry, and is prolonged, if you add astringent medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect, like oil of diaphnetum, because there is a great part of vitriol in it, which is the last medicine;
take oil of diaphnetum and make the dressing with rose oil, and the vinegar of wine is equal in substance;
Then hold the wound tight and use;
Then hold the wound tight and use; and when the wound is finished, honey and ointment are made more effective when applied together, when the flame is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and crush them, and sprinkle them on the honey when it is taken out of the fire.
Then hold the wound tight and use; and then bandage it tightly and hold it outside the body, and never give an aristologist a long time, and root of lilies celestial, which is also like wheat and barley; and in the use of simples or compounds. crush them, and make them into powder, and sprinkle them on the honey that I mentioned above, and use it
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then take away the rotten parts that cause corruption, and makes an imprint in the bone, or has stiff limbs, or has tumors; If the fistula heals, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that arises from the swelling of the pouch of the hand, or the heel, or sometimes arises in other places;
and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, if it comes to an abscess, it swells and causes the vein to twist as much as it can, and sometimes it even tears the root of the vein, and sometimes it tears the whole thing.</start_of_turn>
and comes the corrosion up to the bone, so that there is intense pain, and the head of the bone is large and dark in color.</start_of_turn
When you have treated it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, if you must, you must do everything that remains to be done from the swelling, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is a great help when the bone is sound, and the vein is healthy.</start_of_turn
And if the nail approaches the hair quickly, and it begins to prick, and the blood spurts, if you can put off the root of the nail as much as the hair, and lift it up, and gently grasp this hair and put on the remaining hair medicines that burn and corrode to consume all. Then treat the wound until it is healed
And if the corrosion is in the bone, if you grasp it, and break it through, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
And if you see the bone cracked, if you break it from the marrow as it is said before, then treat it until it is healed.
And if it is bloody, and black, and it causes great pain, if you can make it healthy first
Then hold the shoulder firmly at the edge of the socket with a cutting instrument, and guard that the cut does not go beyond the cartilage which is below the shoulder, because the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it happens, put something above which will soothe.
The two joints that naturally grow in the hands of certain people are always fleshy, and in some cases there is a part where there is bone, and never a nail, or that they are born at the root of the joint, or that the birth is in our thumbs.
That which is born without fear of pain does not move, and that which is born at the joint is by chance moved;
the size of that which is fleshy is slight, in part barely noticeable: cut at its root from a wide socket
that which is born at the root of the joint is grieved to cure if you keep it covered
In him who is born or must afterwards without a doubt, if you must, first bend the rounded flesh around the bone, then grasp the bone at a convenient place like this, then hold it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The sudden pains that ensue must be brought about by birth, or by wound, or by fire cautery, or by similar things.
If you suspect that the dislocation has healed, if it must be repaired according to their natural forms. then put between two bands or cloths soaked in rose oil, that they do not adhere; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as the limb is bound, if it is suspected
The fire comes to neither of its two with the palm, if it covers that burn so that it must.
The veins are large veins enclosed in fat filled with black bile, which causes swelling in many limbs with pain;
and more often come from those that are fat and lazy and work and bear burdens, than from others.
You must not give the patient any purgatives or enemas of any kind, and then afterwards the rest of the treatment.
The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is with the cautery, and one treats the black blood And thus too, if you tie up the vein and push it out, do it with all your might.
The size of this method is as follows: first rise the hot water-soaked limb very high, until the large vessels are not constricted, then strain the limb of the patient downwards from the buttocks to the part below the knee
then grasp the vein in one, or two, or three places, of a large size, then cut and pull out the black blood from your hand, from the top to the bottom, as much as the patient can tolerate;
and then bind it and command him to keep pressure with meat pressing on the black bile;
And he recommences the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and harms the patient.
The ailments of this sort are according to this manner: Raise the limb of the patient, if there is moisture in the hair, then wash it out, and elevate the limb until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you have no bath, if the fire burns, and then hold the vein long at the shoulder or at the ankle;
then cover the skin with fat, and stretch the vein carefully from the armpit, until it appears when you touch it
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters or the skin appears just like a white thread.
Then stretch the limb upwards until it is freed from the skin, and then pull it towards the heel with a gentle touch, and grasp it in the other hand as much as three fingers.
Then pull the skin over the vein until it appears, then pull the thumb towards the heel as you have done before, and then pull at another nail as you have done before.</start_of_turn>
Then grasp another size, or more if you wish, and pull it out, and grasp the thumb and index finger, and pull them until the second size is reached.</start_of_turn
Then pull out the size by size until it is all out, and then grasp it.</start_of_turn>
And if you do not pull it out and lift it, if there is a splinter at the root of the hair, grasp it and pull it out, and grasp the limb from the top and bottom, until it is freed.</start_of_turn And keep it still, for if it moves, it cannot be treated or lifted, and comes to the harm of the patient.
And when you have finished treating it, if you remove the limb from the wound covered with soft wool in wine and rose oil and keep it healthy
and if its vein is contracted and tortuous and surrounded together, and is not straight, as we have said, if you must do violence to it, do so with all your might, but do not cover it over and handle it as we have previously mentioned
The shape of the iron from which the limb is treated if it is crooked, do not twist it, but only hold it still;
And it is of great danger, for if it were subtle, it would burst the vein; but whether it is great or small, as we have said, this is the form:
And this vein is enclosed in the limb, in hot parts or where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture.
And it appears in another place besides the limb, and this comes from the corruption that comes from the decomposition of the skin, as it comes from the belly of a serpent towards the back, enclosed between the skin and flesh.
And if there is a sign of the commencement of this vein, that is to say if there comes into the limb a very great inflammation, then it must be bound up tightly, and the vein must be forced to desist, like the root of a plant.
When the head of the shoulder is burst, if you think you should wrap around a piece of lead from one and a half inches to two and a half inches, and the knot, and leave the lead in the limb, and every time it swells up, if you wrap around the lead the knot and the limb again
And if it is too long, if in a part it is cut off, and it embraces the remainder, do not cover it in its root, until it is completely expelled. for if you cover it, if it returns to the bone, it causes inflammation and gangrene or death, and makes the disease worse.
therefore it is necessary to treat it thoroughly and completely, and leave nothing or bone behind
never is this vein treated with five palms of length, or ten, and one hand comes out to me, from ten palms of length, and when you cover it, if there remains even a hair or hole, and you pierce it through to the end, so that everything is gone
or the matter that is inside is evacuated, and mix with the medicine that prevents gangrene, and then cure it like an abscess.
And never in this vein have hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow or the wrist, and there comes forth a spurt of blood, and from which it leaps downwards.
And never in this vein have hands rained, even when it opens at the elbow or the wrist, and there comes forth a spurt of blood, and from which it leaps downwards.
And never has this vein had hands rain, even when it opens at the elbow, or at the wrist, and there comes forth blood spurting; cure it as we have said before. And this disease is called in our land "buffalo disease," forasmuch as it often causes swelling of the calves, and is a small wound that arises between skin and bone, and goes throughout the body, upwards and downwards, and it causes pain all along the limb, until the skin is broken or it bursts, and spurts out.
And is accompanied by the putrefaction of some humors, such as bile, serum, urine, and worms or belly-ache
And doubt arises from its malice, for when it goes through the body and reaches the head, it comes to the oil, by chance returns, and destroys the oil. and this often happens.
When you see it heal and abate, if one cannot force it until it goes away:
then you must tightly bind the limb above and below with strong thread, and then hold above and push down, and if it does not go away, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies
and the greater harm it does is when it contaminates the oil, as we have said
and if you see it coming or near the oil, seize its tail and push down, then hold above, and force it out
And it is recommended to use the patient for the evacuation of solid medicines which solve the bad humors carried, and to feed him with nourishing foods.
When you see it cured and treated, if you cannot force it, do not force it until it goes: if you must, then bind the limb above and below with a strong ligature, and press above and below, and as it comes out, seize it by the hair and burn it with fire; and the greater harm it does is when it comes out with the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, grasp its lash and press, then press above and below; and you must use the patient of cooling down the body with medicines that dissolve harmful humors and eating nourishing foods. This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes in the limbs, and as it moves from limb to limb.
I have seen this to be the case I was called to a sick woman, and found her arm swollen, and saw a small swelling in the pit of her elbow
and I observed that it had become like a worm in the armpit, more swollen than anything, as if alive silver when it breaks from its root
the pain went away from that limb, and settled in the armpit, and then later returned throughout the whole limb, until it reached the other arm
Then he told me that it twisted back towards the body, as I saw it.
I wondered how it managed to move from limb to limb, because I had never seen anyone with this disease before.</start_of_turn However, I would rather keep silent than move with pain in a limb, but I do not wish to keep silent, as I saw her in the woman.
And I thought that this was the reason why the woman had dry skin, and her veins uncovered, and because of that appeared that constraint of the wind;
And it does not appear to me according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist skin and veins restored
And when you see that this disease is cured, and the patient feels that pain, if she shows you if as we have said, if the swelling above and below has vanished, and then rest until that constraint of the wind has disappeared from the limb And cauterize the limb;
And if you do not see it at your eyes, if you cure it of what evacuates the wind, as with foul pills, and oily pills, and similar things.
If the doctor gives vent to these winds, if like foul pills, and pills of serpin, and like other things of that sort.
When there is variety in their points, some large, some small, and some with hooks and nails; and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces
and that which breaks in no limb breaks in two ways or in the principal limb breaks, as with the brain, shoulder, forearm, hand, foot, rib, intestine, bladder, and similar members When the limb snaps, indeed in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you: When the limb snaps, indeed in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, will teach you: if you are aware of the extraction of this arrow, for the corpse will follow afterwards in many positions. and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, if the limb is fractured, and the wound is cured.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone, and blood spurts from the socket which is above the brain, is like a scourging, swelling and turning inward, and redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and mixing of senses, and vomiting of bile; And sometimes it is without cause, without any bruises or wounds. and sometimes it causes speechlessness and deafness; and leaps from a moist wound that looks like boils, and in the leap just like burnt hair
and if you notice this sign, if you are to take care of it, draw out the splinter if it is not embedded
The sign of the splinter when it hurts or aches is that it is close to the left nipple, and it feels just like if it were stuck in something hard, do not remove it freely and sometimes the splinter moves just like boils, and leaves black blood, and comes with cold sweat and cold sweat, and fainting. The wounds therefore signify doubt that the blood has drained away.
And the sign of the dislocated shoulder that never lets go is when it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes high and quets the food away.</start_of_turn
And if the sponge tears in the covering of the wound, if it is too small, leave the small bones; it gives great swelling and pain and breathing difficulty and the limb moves out of its place
If the spleen or stomach is broken, by chance if there is a jump from the wound, nothing of the indigestible meat is left.
If the spleen or stomach is broken, and in the jump there is no stool from the large intestine, if there is no hope of recovery, do not attempt to extract the stone.</start_of_turn>
and if the sponge tears in the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes out, the patient feels great pain: the wound is mortal.
As for the other limb, if the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the armpit and the spine and the buttocks and the thigh and the foot and the limb mentioned above, are all in more or less the same condition.</start_of_turn When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I have already told you, because of that which you do.
There is at home a sponge that fell or drooled in the root of the nail: I grasped it, and it slipped from the other side of the ear, and it was healed without harm.
And thus he took a dart that had fallen into the fat of the oil of olives, and the dart was whole, and did not reach anything except the tip towards the foot, and the dart was as long as an arc of a Turkish bow, all in all a foolish thing to do.
he game was sound, and there was no bad accident to him.
And thus he took a dart from the throat to the groin, and the dart was an Arab dart at an ear
I saw the barbers, and I deceived them as long as I could, and was sound with the groin
And thus he took a dart at home, that was in the thigh or belly, and I thought he was going to die;
And then, if he does not recover within XXX days, if he does not mend his ways; I shall then cut off his limb, burn out his entrails, break his bones, and cause him no further harm.
If I see that there is a fracture of bone or a wound that has penetrated deeply,
I will leave the limb whole and permit him to return to his natural habits; I will find no rest in his works.
If another man has fractured his face and the wound is deep, he will suffer great pain;
And he will groan in pain.
And she drew out an arrow at home of the prince the king, who was sitting crooked among the lice, and there was a swelling downwards on the right side. and the arrow was fully withdrawn.
I was called to treat her after she had been crooked for three days If I find the wound very painful.
I saw her with great anxiety and did not feel well; and there was pain and swelling in her right ear
I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on her ear plaster with digestive medicine, so that it would not swell further and there appeared to me the head of the arrow
and there appeared to me the head of the arrow I put the thumb and index finger in their places, closed the wound, and held the patient’s hand tight, until he felt the arrow go out of his body.
and he told me. I put upon the wound a corrosive ointment with my hands, until it was thick, and held it, and felt the head of the arrow that was coming out of place at its root
then I aided the opening of the wound with that ointment, until the head of the arrow appeared to me visibly
and it passed well three months, and then it grew so large that I put in the nails and held it apart with one hand and the other, and I could not bear it anymore.
Therefore, I will continue to try subtle and ingenious methods until I have firmly secured the dressings, as is done in the end of this chapter, until I have completed the treatment, and I will restore the wound.
And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. I restored it therefore, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured
Or as you have said concerning the quality of the extraction of some arrows, if you apply your treatment to what I do not understand, for the books do not teach me everything;
but the learned masters know very well both great and small things, and concerning what is present and lacking, true that you will find nine works and a new instrument, following the sequence of the strange things that arise in this art
I say that the arrows do not issue from members or are ficketed except in two ways: or by loosening from the limb or they enter, or by some other means.
and that which issues forth by itself is an arrow that has penetrated flesh, and it issues forth never more.
And if it does not issue forth now, if you leave it until the wound is complete, and rejoice in its issue;
even if it is fixed in bone and cannot issue, if you leave it alone for a few days, and move it every day
then it will issue, and if it does not issue, if you pierce through all the surrounding parts, until the limb is swollen, and then take it away
And if the splinter is replaced in the bone if we cannot see it, if the patient tries in every way If you feel it, if the pain has no palpable cause;
if you do not find it by the swelling of the wound, or by the depth of the wound, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, if the pain lasts as long as the wound is great.
if you pull out the splinter if you find it, and if there is cartilage in the splinter which is split into two parts at the bone that you pull, and then break or crush the cartilage of the splinter as much as you can pull it out
but take care not to break the splinter, only pull it out firmly.
And if you do not do it once, if the limb is already swollen, then grasp it more firmly, for the extraction will be joyful. and if bleeding prevents you, do what we have said in this chapter about the cure of it.
Be wary of cutting into the nerve and the vein, and put them in such a way that you can easily draw out the arrow without danger, or to break or tear, or firmly or gently.
Put the patient in the posture in which he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid of all, and if you do not know how, follow what he shows you
The arrow that comes from another place, or there is no wound, or the skin is stretched at the place where it is seen or felt.
Take hold until the bone can be grasped, and then remove it. If the bone is fractured now.
And if it is retained in the bone, if you twist your hand round and round, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then withdraw it.</start_of_turn
And if it cannot be set, if you leave it in peace, and then resume the extraction until it is fractured again;
And if it is of an arrow, it is, if it has struck completely;
And if it is of an arrow, it is, if it has struck completely; and if you see an instrument hanging, if you administer it, let the point of the arrow enter the hole of the instrument.
Then withdraw the force, and if the arrow is caught, let the instrument with the pointed end enter in order to ease the extraction.
And if the bandage is soiled, if you must cover all the surrounding fat or the venom is there, if you wish, then cure the wound as it should be cured.</start_of_turn>
And if the arrow is broken or split or at the belly or in the bladder or at the costus, and it is close by, and you must cover above, if you cover it
keep the belly and the nerves covered, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary And the treatment until it is healed.
And the shape of the tweezers with which we treat the wounds is similar to the beak of an osprey, and thus is the form:
And there are many ways to do it great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the wound
The shape at the end of the bone is like that of a bird's beak, to push out the tip of the splinter, as it is like this:
From veins from which one has bled for a long time, for in this case there is either a head wound or a wound at the sixteenth, that is to say: Two veins that are behind the ears, which are covered with coarse hair. and two arteries which are in the temples appear; And if two veins are two cubits wide, that are called "aspires, and the vein that is between the eyebrows. and the vein that is at the back of the neck and the two cords that are in the collarbone and the two veins that are under the jaw, which are called "augeherich. and the two veins that are under the tongue.
The common veins are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the chest, and they call it the "chief vein". And the marrow is called "fast," and is composed of the cephalic and basal parts, and they call it the common people "bone marrow. And the basal part is either soft or broken, and they call it the common people "bone marrow," and it is above the navel, and it is that from which we saw, which appears openly above the pouch.
And the collateral vein is the one that is between the ulnar and the annular, and if there are two of them;
and in the arm and the forearm there are three veins: one is from the elbow of the left side of the armpit, and the second is the sural which is at the ankle of the right side And the vein which is called "nesse," that is at the ankle of the other thigh;
And in the other limb are three veins alongside those.
The blood of the veins that are behind the ears helps as old evacuations and has emigration.
And the qualities of the blood, as I have told you, are that you raise the head of the patient and rub the limb or the veins are rough Then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, as long as the two veins behind the ears appear behind the ears depending on the head: So you must know that when you feel the pulse from behind your ears, it is a sign of strangulation;
Then take the lancet, and with the thumb and forefinger grasp the vein up to the bone, then keep your hand steady over the vein above, and press and tear the skin and the vein well; do this until blood spurts out; make the bleeding cease as long as you see.
Then strain and tie, until it is healed;
And I have already said about the incision and the cautery or the first book
The blood of the two arteries in the two temples is worth an ancient emigration, sode, and obtalmia accustomed, and at the root of the tears there are vesicles.
And as for the quality of the patient if it is as I have said: And that the patient is groaning his neck, so that the two veins open wide; And he feels the pulse throbbing in his hand, and then he marks it with his finger.
Then he places his thumb on the vein at the wrist of his hand, and grasps the lancet with his index finger, and grasps the vein at the wrist and the elbow, as you have done with two other veins, and do the evacuation of blood as you please;
Then loosen the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton And then bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
As for what we have said about it in other books concerning its treatment and extraction, or its commencement in the book itself.
The blood of the front vein is as valuable as that of the cephalic vein, for it has ancient diseases of the face, emigration, and redness.
And if the patient strains his neck by twisting, as the vein bursts. then take the instrument which is called the "forceps", which is like this:
And put the point on the vein, and hold with your hand, or something else, and let blood flow out as much as you see fit; Then loosen the patient’s neck and ligate the vein until it is whole and never again let a wide flame do it.
However, I do not recommend that the flame be too great; because the bone is close, and by chance the flame breaks the bone when it is thin
The blood of two veins that are two cubits long helps with the swelling, and with the heat, and with the redness, and with the swelling in the armpit, and with diseases of the face.
and the quality of their blood is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting anything at all, as before.</start_of_turn>
then the same, and whether the blood is thin or thick, with a little length and a little width, because there is no fat.</start_of_turn And if the flame is subtle, by chance if it breaks.</start_of_turn
Then make the blood flow, as much as you are able, and then hold above cotton, and bind it well.</start_of_turn
The blood of the vein does not flow if it is cold, and in fever, and in diseases of the face, as with measles and redness that comes on the face, and even when it is old;
The blood in the vein does not flow if the patient is shivering, then strain his neck to the left hand side, and take a long thin flame, and put it on the lip between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well enough, and it must be corrected now.
Do not go too deep with the burn, and correct the blood according to your need, then keep it bound for one night, for it is moistened and restored
The blood of the two armpits helps to loosen the swelling, and to start mixing, and to cure diseases, and to stop itching, and to remove corrodens, and herpes, and stomach ailments.
And the quality of the blood is such that if the patient pulls out his collar from both sides, as we have said;
Or let the master be above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat, then open the vein slowly, and take blood temperately, or as much as is necessary.</start_of_turn>
Then make the other part in the other vein, and loosen the tension, and gently pull the veins so that the patient does not feel choked.</start_of_turn And let him leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
The blood of the armpits helps in the swelling of the groin, in the beginning of mumps, and in many diseases, and in swelling, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and in stones; and the quality of the blood is that when the patient strains his neck alternately, as we have said; either the master is standing above the patient's head, and the patient sits on one seat, then grasps the vein long and widely, then pulls out the blood gently, or as much as is necessary; and then repeat the operation in the other vein, then release the thread, and strain moderately the middle veins, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed. The blood of the veins of the upper limbs helps to clot in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and toothaches and pains.
And if the patient is able to sit before you, and you restrain his neck as I have said; Then turn the face up, and look at two veins, one on the right cheek and the other on the left, and know them by their blackness, and by the fact that there are small black veins running alongside them
Therefore take both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, if the larger one is at the back of the jaw, and both of the smaller ones below and beside, for this is a foolish way
And if the quality of the blood is to make the patient sit before thee, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at two veins, one on the right side of the liver and the other on the left, and know them by this that they are black, and that they have small black veins running through them: so do one and the other; and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if one of the largest parts of the spleen is pale, and both veins that are below and above are pale, for this is the same method. The blood of the veins below the tongue helps after the cephalic blood, and this is at the widening of the throat, and with eye diseases, and with mouth diseases
And if the patient is a healthy man, if he sits between your hands before the sun, and he sticks out his tongue, and looks downwards at every cost, he will see a black vein.
Then he will see both of them [the veins] together, and do not fear them too much, for these are the arteries.
The veins which we commonly call healthy are commonly sick in two ways:
or when they are pricked by a sharp flame or olive oil as with a saw, and are called "aneurysm". And they are large and subtle according to the size and expansion of the veins. The flame of fire is soft if it is mild, and is broad as you see.
And they have the master to open the superficial veins filled with large blood and containing great blood and trouble; And thus is the form of the olive-tree flame:
and is more pointed towards the tip, and is for the healthier veins, or where there is little yellow blood.</start_of_turn>
And thus is the form of the olive-tree flame: the sap of the basilisk, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments such as nausea of the throat, or cough, or pain in the belly;
and it is useful to the patient that he remain quiet and that he abstain from the artery which is near. And if he grasps the artery, and blood flows out, if he covers it up, as I have said before and must not be pained by the flame, but must cut if necessary
and if the basilisk does not clearly appear, it is sufficient to grasp it, and bind another one instead or do you wish no rain from it, or do you keep the vein closed in the arm: it will burst openly. and the cavity to the fire is stifled, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if you see the blood vessel, if you must restrain the arm, touch the vessel until you know the pulse.</start_of_turn then sign the limb of the shoulder, and then bind the arm, and restrain the vein from the fire.</start_of_turn and beware that you do not cut the artery when you see the limb inflamed, for that is the artery.</start_of_turn quit you must wait.</start_of_turn>
And if you see it swell up like the urine of a child, and it is neither red nor pale, then know that it is without an artery. Hurry then, and place your hand over its length, and hold your hand steady so it does not move, for many times it has happened to me.</start_of_turn> Its limb hangs limply, and leave it alone, and do not move the patient;
Or be cautious, and do not move it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if it is not stained and it is painful, and medicine is not present, if the artery is burst, for the head of the shoulder is drawn back.</start_of_turn And he must remain still.
And take an escort of assistants, and make him sit, and take one of the halves and bind it well up to the other side;
And if he remains still, that is good; If not, if the physician, as we have said, gives powders that stop blood
and the staining does not last in multiple situations because of the small quantity of the wound, and the fear of the patient’s hand.
The blood of the vein in the middle helps that it heals without difficulty from the root downwards, from the head downwards, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said
And it is proper for the patient to grasp with his thumb the nerve that is sore, and if he does not grasp it too firmly, and he finds the nerve, and it swells, and the patient is either seized or by chance cannot recover.
The nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some home because of its slightness, it is proper that you leave it from the anesthetic instrument. And hold the nerve to your side
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, if it has a long loop.
The pain of the cephalic vein helps, that it brings blood without head, and helps the eyes;
And it is proper to cauterize with the olive or myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not contain any nerves or arteries. Whatever, it is better to ask for the lightest, and do not grieve if it fails the first time, and we shall begin again. And by chance it swells up at someone's home, which cannot be done the first time, but it does not grieve anything.</start_of_turn>
The quality of the blood is according to your thoughts.</start_of_turn>
The first thing you must know about health is that blood should only be drawn for the preservation of health and to avert future diseases.</start_of_turn>
or the blood is taken from one of the three veins that are or should be.</start_of_turn namely the cephalic, facial, and brachial veins.</start_of_turn and the sign of repletion appears; that is, when swelling subsides in the beginning of the pain, in vomiting and after eating.</start_of_turn
And if one must restore the first or third joint, after two hours or three-quarters of an hour.
The healing of the ailments has no definite time, but whenever need be for joint or nut, in every hour and in all tension.
And must not be restored more than twelve years, and women carrying for more than four months until the seventh month One must not strengthen the ones who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone sees that he has been healed in any way, if it is necessary, if there is a hernia of a lesser fistula, if there is much retained saliva, so that the veins do not draw out the nutritious humors from the principal limbs
Neither must one keep oneself too fat with meat, nor drunk, when it is necessary, for there is need of it; neither must one be overly cold nor too hot
And if one suffers from madness after a fierce passion, and vomiting, and belly distress, and many times of urination in women, and childbirth, and watching and lying down, and all that is good or bad;
Then subtile the humors, if they are not great, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you can.
Then bathe in cold or hot water, so that nothing hinders, to subtilize the blood, and restore from the vein to the third part, as we have said before
And keep yourself from work, from worry, from luxury, and from similar things;
And bind and soothe, and keep the patient higher than the one who is caring for him, and wipe the hands twice or thrice, and then extract the thread slowly, because if it is too tight or loose, if cannot correct it without
And then he rubs the limb with his hands, until the veins swell, and one feels them.
And then he moistens the skin with a little oil, then puts his thumb of his left hand on that vein below the limb a thumb’s breadth or as much as he wants to make it bleed.
For there are veins that flee just like strings to the wound, and if they are of such a kind that are filled with blood, so that when one puts on the flame, if one takes it away from the flame, it cannot open the vein, and that is what is often the result of this and if it is necessary to open the vein, if the wound is too wide, because of this one must be cautious so that the patient is warned about these things
And if the vein bursts the first time, that is good; If not, if it bursts again, even more so, one must hold the limb still or at least as much as possible, for if it is not done, the wound will not heal.</start_of_turn>
If the limb is swollen and the patient groans, and if one leaves it for a day or two, and does not bind the arm: then there will certainly be pus.</start_of_turn>
do not enter or bathe, then reset the blood if it clots;
and if the blood vessel is small, or if it is without support and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, if you are confident in the loss itself with all your might.</start_of_turn
And the work a little patient, even though his limbs are swollen. for often in this work, when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not renew the bleeding, put on a little oil, for it softens the flesh of blood and makes it limp in this limb the oil that you put on it
and give the oil to absorb the blood that comes out to stop the flow of blood;
and this also makes the limb tremble and bow down when you put it on the limb. if you do it carelessly and it comes out when it is too large
And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, even if it is not very serious except for this time or the opening of the vein is small, if you are in a hurry, put on the wet sponge and roll up a bandage, and bind for an hour.
And do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains fixed afterwards for some days without any blackening or greening, do not trouble me with it.</start_of_turn> And if you see it, put nothing of aloe or myrrh moistened in calamus juice, mustard, or the like.</start_of_turn>
And often happens an abscess and appearance of blood from the basilisk.</start_of_turn
Put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft under the compression of the hand, that is an evil sign. Heed what we have said and do not place anything on it, for by chance in this way without an artery;
but it makes the limb swell dry to strengthen the limb, then treat it with another treatment, until it is healed
Treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.</start_of_turn
For if it is without color, if you leave it to its swelling as long as it is red; and if you see it big, if you leave it until it is faint and if it is too yellow, if you leave it cool.</start_of_turn>
And it is expedient for the plains and strong person, and has the skill of extracting blood, to make the wound wider and the flame bigger.</start_of_turn>
And for the weakling, do the opposite; make him whole again quickly and often, and one must make him whole by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of healing is useful for the restoration of blood and the preservation of nerves, and is better than if the blood were long rather than wide.
And for the one whose limb needs blood, it is recommended to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice if he is pale, if there is three or four times more blood; and if he has a cold complexion, let him beforehand eat soft bread soaked in sweet syrup or honey with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
If he pricks at the blood vessels after the evacuation of blood, it is necessary to know that he will spit frothy bile, an odoriferous sweat, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of the vein.
And if he sees his arm turn pale, and recovers again, if it is known, when he is filled with great blood, that he must rise up and rise up again, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
And whoever has seen his arm swollen after the first bleeding, and has great pain, if he stays like this for three days after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever has seen himself recover from the other side, if he must recover by the second or third day.
For there is much blood in the limb that is already pale, and it causes fever. if it is necessary to manage a great quantity, and to widen the opening as much as it bleeds in the palm of the hand. then you must restore all the blood vessels and put your hand over the wound while it is still bleeding in the palm of the hand, for many times the blood escapes when the vessel is neglected
and do not hesitate to pull out the limb if you see it slipping again, and close the wound, pressing firmly over it; if it is crooked, extend the limb as much as possible, for that would be bad
leave it until it is healed again or you put on the tip of the flame, until the blood vessel that is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out, and put on some water above it and press lightly.
And if the vein has escaped, if you leave it and do not restrain me, as long as the incision is calmed.
And if necessary is to drain blood a second time, if the same in this limb or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is stained in leu of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And if the patient’s hand is plunged into hot water, as long as the flesh is red;
then it should be firmly bound so that the wound opens well, and that the limb is neither too wide nor too long;
and if it cannot be closed, let the wound be large and close to the joint of the hand, and if it does not heal, plunge the hand into hot water again and leave the blood to clot in the water until enough time has passed
otherwise do not reinsert the hand into the hot water, for we put more in danger than in this state;
The blood of this vein is more valuable than all the others, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand and bathe it in warm water, until the swelling has gone down, if you see it The saliva from the right hand is worth for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand and bathe it in warm water, until the swelling has gone down, if you see it all the way through, and if you handle it carefully, it will not grieve anything.
Do not handle it too much, for the nerves are already loosened from their sheath, and then reset the hand in warm water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and do not attempt to move it.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary with the cautery, if you put oil and lint on the wound to close it, do so carefully.</start_of_turn
The blood in the left hand is worth the disease of mice, and do the same as I have said before for the upper part.</start_of_turn
The blood of the armpit is worth for all diseases that are in the chest, as with diseases of the marrow, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the calves and the ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its saliva is that if the patient has been soaked in warm water, and has rubbed on the swelling until it has gone down, and has placed a bandage over the joint of the limb. And if the vein is at the ankle, and below it there are loose threads of hair in the vicinity, there will be a discharge of blood.
healthy or bloody discharge, or at the ankle, that much blood flows out.
And if you see blood on the hair near the nail, protect the nerves that are below, and drain just as if you were grasping;
or the fire is extinguished.
And if it cannot be kept in place, if you reset the bone in water, and let the vein drain well.</start_of_turn
And if the blood vessel must be reset the first time, if you do it again later, because the blood vessel is salty;
do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same with the other nail equally
The pulse of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of fire, and its blood is worth the pain of the groin, when it is for blood that is hot.</start_of_turn>
When the patient is between or in water, and pulls below the ankle twice in twisting, because otherwise the vein will not open;
And if she [the wound] opens, if the same in all ways that you can, and through and through. it is better that you close it, for the wound is deep and it is likely to burst again at home.</start_of_turn>
it is better that you close it, for the wound is deep and it is likely to burst again at home.</start_of_turn> And if you do not manage it, if the same does not bleed from its opening or its depth, and toward the little toe, and guard against nerves.</start_of_turn
and make so much pressure on the blood that you see, and then loosen the knot, and put on cotton and bind.</start_of_turn it is now healed.</start_of_turn>
Bandages are made of horn, or cobwebs, or wool.</start_of_turn
And if the dressing is done in two ways: Or by cutting and drawing out blood, or by cutting only.
And this bleeding which is done by cutting if it is done in two ways: Or it is very hot, or it is done with heat;
And the bleeding which is done by cutting and by drawing out blood if it is done in twelve days of pain, for in that case one is all at the head of the sufferer. And the other is at the collarbone; And two others in two ribs of the collarbone; And the patient should suck on a ventouse to loosen the wind from the belly. And the patient should suck on a ventouse twice to loosen the wind from the belly And the patient should suck on a ventouse over the crupies And the patient should suck on the ventouse at both arms together And the patient should suck on the ventouse at both legs together And the patient should suck on the ventouse at both ankles together
And the vomiting does not help in any way, for there are many veins that are scattered throughout the body, and for this reason it does not do any good to vomit, as if we were draining blood from a vein It is only useful to vomit when it comes from repletion, without any fire or sensation of fire, in no disease that comes from eating, until all the food is emptied from the stomach
And if necessity or custom demands it, if the physician must give a sneeze at the beginning or at the end of a month, or at any time, and must do so with every yawn and sigh.
for there are those who, when they must sneeze, feel a heavy head.
and there are those who experience swelling and redness in their face, head, neck, and eyes
and those who have a discharge of blood in their mouth, and have lost their tongue, and are spitting blood. and those who think, and see nothing but blood and fear and death and similar things.
When these signs appear, and even if it is only lightly moist, we command the patient to wind after two hours.
Blood from the vein helps to relieve the pain in the head … which comes from the eyes, and it is not permitted to do anything else before evacuating all the pus
And if this vomiting is in lieu of the blood of the cephalic vein, it does not suffice only those who are of cold complexion in use, or who have a dullness, for this can cause great discomfort.
And for this reason it does not suffice only those who are of cold temperament in use, but those who have or suffer from chief colds illnesses.
And for this reason I advise you not to use it on patients suffering from cold or severe diseases
Vomiting in the collar is in lieu of the blood of the chief and the basal veins, and for this reason it is worth at the greatest extent to the point of pain in the chest, and to swelling of the channel of the windpipe, and all that is similar to this.
It is not to be forced too much, for if it stays too firmly, it can cause an obstruction of the belly or the stomach or the bowels.
The winds blow as two ribs of the collar cause pains of the head, and swelling and inflammation, and constriction, and pain at the root of the teeth, and is in lieu of the blood of the vein.
And you must command the patient to express his hand to put it in, that he does not cut the artery, and does not bleed excessively.
The vomiting of these days is like a disease of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. And is in lieu of the blood of the two livers.
The winds of the spleen are harmful to health, coming from heat and congestion.
The vomiting of the belly is as much as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these three veins.
And instruct the patient not to fear too much pain, for the blood is thick and knows the bones and nerves and arteries.
The swelling that is on the buttocks is worth as much as blood clot at the foundation, and has diseases of bones, and it is recommended that the swelling be large and of hair, that it has to be well treated. And by chance, if it should be subtle, if it breaks; it makes great wounds.
The swellings of the legs swell open, because they draw blood from all over the body, and cause as much pain as the ancient rains, and the marrow, and the bladder, and restore the flowers
and are in place of the two shoulders, and the two knees, and all of them weaken the body after a long time, and cause death in many positions
The manner of applying the ventouse is as follows: if you apply it at first sight, and with immediate effect, and put it on firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing so until you see blood flowing freely and bloodstained, and open the wound.
Then be quick, and remove the ventouse, and take care of the body, for there are some who have sustained severe pain and opened wounds: if it is necessary to wound only once, and to make large wounds, and a deep wound; and do so gently.
And if it is not too big, if you can wound twice: the first time in order to narrow the large wound
And if it is not very thick, if you must wound it for the third time.
and when our veins swell with blood, too much, too little, if we must puncture it once more. and when our veins burst with blood, if we must repeat this treatment often;
and if it is not very thick, if you must wound it for the third time; if you perceive that the wound has become perceptible, and it is for those who have thick skin and tough nails, and who have swollen pores, that you must apply liniment of essential oils which are aperitif and dissolving: if it is in this state, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
If it is in the armpit, with oil of cresson, or of poppy seed, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the swelling is large and cold, if you take amaranth oil, or balsam oil, or rue oil, and the like.
If he has a tender pulse and large pores, one must not put oil on, but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or lime water, or pumpkin seed water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And if there is moisture in the mouth, if it lifts easily, or with vinegar of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
And if there are yellow spots, they rise from old wine, or from sea water, or from a decoction of elderberry or chamomile, or from other similar things.
Do not put on a suction cup in front of the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
Do not sleep after the suction, but keep warm when you must suctor and when you are sucturing.
And take care that the one who is being suctioned is not feverish, and that he is not too rough or inflamed; If he grasps cold things, such as pomegranates, grapes, onions, and lettuce at ease, and similar things; and mixes herbs, mustard, and fat, and moist meats.
and mixes herbs, mustard, and fat, and moist meats. And he who has a cold complexion, if he grasps honey syrup, and fragrant wine which is between autumn and summer, and broth, and herbs and small oils and marjoram;
and when he has a cold wind, he must drink more than eat
and must give to others homes never three times in a row before or after, because of the ventilation, or for comfort of the main parts; or be silent about it, but do not say it unless the cold ones drink it.
The wounds which are made to be cauterized are those which are made upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and under the kidney, and upon the belly and the buttock and the groin and the heel, for in no limb does the fire cause any wound except to draw blood from limb to limb, as we do when we put on the cautery to the nipples when they are bleeding.
in order to reduce the viscosity which is in the limb, as we do when we make incisions on the belly and the buttock to lighten the limb.
and to stop the pain, when there is swelling or fracture, if by its attractive virtue it pulls out the swelling, or evacuates the fracture from its place
and in this way when it is put on the liver and the spleen when there is retained moisture, these incisions are administered empty in order to suck up so little Neither fire nor water is ever administered together, and neither is it ever plain water that is used for these diseases; for in such cases we fill the sponge with hot water, or water alone, or we add herbs that are conducive to this.
The form of the wound administered with fire is as follows:
And there must be two broad and half palms of butter, and there must be oil or cost oil at the bottom of the mileu, as for extracting an awl, and whether it be hair or wool in front so that it does not burn the patient when putting it on the limb.
And there must be in the mileu a rod of barley or iron, to put a bandage in, and there must be both large and small according to the diseases and the extent of these which take them
For the wounds of the veins are different from those of meats, and fats from bones.
And must one place this ventouse upon the limb:
And must one place this ventouse upon the limb: grasp the sleeve of silk or linen and put it between the ventouse and the limb, so that it closes either at the bottom of the ventouse or that it does not burn the patient.
and then place it upon the limb, and you must either place it upon the opening that we have mentioned, so that when we see that there is vapor, and the bone is loosened, we can remove the ventouse.
and grasp the lining as before, and repeat it often, if you are skillful.
In the ventouse, which is administered in cases of pneumonia, at all severity, there is no opening or hole, and it is only administered when it is clear of inflammation, and is placed upon the limb only slightly
And thus it is that form:
The wounds do not yield until they are treated in limbs or where it is impossible to apply a bandage due to their smallness, as with books and gums, and similar things. And in such things as flesh stripped of hair, if it is desired or not, and other similar things;
and the quality of the sufferer is that when you find wounds that are in soft and delicate tissues without sensation of pain, if you touch them, they bleed
and put them in hot water, until they are soft, and do not have any pain in their bellies and then either drain the vein and apply a bandage, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply the wound
When they are even and smooth, and shine, if it is bone or we can put on a suction cup, put it on, for it is worth more afterwards.
If not, if you lift the bone easily, then slightly with water, move it well, and then release it;
and if it remains too much afterwards, wet the edges with cold water, and put on, until the wound is closed
and if the wound is multiplied, put on crushed glass or fragments of tile, and similar things, until it is closed.
or you remove half of the burnt bones, and leave them until they are consumed by the bone, if it stops now.
If you have more pain, take other medicines.
If the medicines do not suffice, rub the limb with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until blood flows, and then withdraw the needle.
When you see that it is bleeding, sprinkle some alum or bruised herbs or ashes on it, and it will stop now.</start_of_turn>
This is the end of the text. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is restoration of fracture and displacement.
Beware, dear son, that in this book, you will not find anything that the ancient books do not contain, no letter or writing.</start_of_turn>
And for this reason it is strange in our land, for I have never found it elsewhere.</start_of_turn
And I know of nothing, except by the science of ancient books, or because I have studied it so thoroughly that I have mastered the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
And I have described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have abbreviated at the end, and I have made it clear the forms of the instruments which are mentioned, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Therefore, I say that the prologue of this book and the chapters contain the essence of the word and that the learned man who reads and comprehends them will find true understanding, for those who have been proven to be skilled in this noble art and have learned it well.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, if you can, you must hasten the healing of the patient from one side and the other, if nothing else hinders you, if there is weakness of the limb, or immaturity, or old age. or if the tension is not very strong, or too cold;
And eat cold juices, such as broth and ale, and do not drink wine, do not eat greasy foods, and do not eat too much meat that fills the veins of blood, until you have no doubt of the post-cautery, or of the swelling of the limb.
if he returns to his senses at the first moment, take governance as he used to.
And when the broken bones begin to restore, if you must know that you must nourish the patient with foods that make great nourishment, or that have viscosity, such as barley cooked in broth, peas, and beans, fish, eggs, cheese, and fat, and similar things.</start_of_turn> For at a part of nourishment, rest returns muscle and more easily breaks the fracture.</start_of_turn>
And know that bones that are fractured of splintered do not mend well together, neither do they knit according to their nature because of the drying out of the limb, nor those that are too tender, as bones of small children
but there is no remedy, rest on the fractured bone that is large and firm which is found and joins the limb together, as long as it remains firm as it was before And do not eat anything from its source, and for this reason we advise nourishing of coarse foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are of various kinds in many ways.</start_of_turn>
For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the limb, or of the bone, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the ways of fracture. For there are fractures that go only skin-deep, and others by cutting, like the size of a needle to write with.</start_of_turn>
For there are fractures that go only skin-deep, and others by cutting, like the size of a needle to write with.</start_of_turn> And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small tear.</start_of_turn
And if there is any reason that has its own instrument and its own method in restoring, according to what is remembered to come into its place
and is known to break bones by this that it leaps up well by pushing and by the pressure of the hand
and when there is no swelling or pain, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no break
but it can well have swelling or fracture or small break. If you do not know with certainty whether it is twisted or broken, but only that the hand is moved, but put on medicines that will come afterwards, and then strain it now subtly.
And the veins that break that go into the marrow, and are the two parts of the joint, it is necessary to put them in place equally, even as after the abscesses have gone away
And if a boil comes out with a burst, do not leave any hair, until the boil is calmed;
then put it equal to the muscle that you must grasp firmly and steadily, and hair that the healing is more gentle than the healing of this or that there are pieces.
then hold it, as it should be after that
And if there are broken bones, if they extend from two parts, if it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or at two strings, or at a string and at your hand;
and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the parts of the limb break, if they are dislocated, remember by all means to keep the addition to the bone at the muscle that you must grasp, and keep that by your work no wound or pain comes to the patient
And hold the arms firmly by the bones according to the best forms.
And he should feel well in the hand if it seems that it is not well:
if it is twisted well, and do not constrain it too much, do not press as those who do who cause it to come out at the incision and contraction of the limb as we have often seen
When the limb is at a point, if the patient feels well that it does not move, do not watch or sleep or turn or move in any way; and keep the limb so secure that he does not feel any pain For when he does not feel any pain, if it is not at a point, and you can put it in partial disposal that he does not feel any pain;
and keep the limb so secure that he does not feel any pain For when he does not feel any pain, if it is not at a point, and you can put it in partial disposal that he does not feel any pain; And keep it properly aligned, so that no twisting arises when you restore it.
And the quality of the limb is as I have told you
The fractures of the limb are diverse in small and large size and in shape.</start_of_turn>
For there are small limbs like arms and feet and the like: it is necessary to cover them with soft and fine linen cloths those which are large, like thighs and legs
it is necessary to cover them with a wide and strong thread, for the large threads embrace the whole large limb and constrain it evenly, so that there is no tension;
then take hold of the limb firmly, three turns or four according to the size of the limb, and grasp the hand one hand at the top of the break and strain less, so that the break slips a little bit;
And soften the limb a little more, both front and back, as much as you grasp a large part of the limb still sound, then take hold of the limb once more, and turn the dislocation back to its proper position.
Then raise up the lower part of the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we mentioned before
Then put between the broken bones some flaxseed or bandages, so that they are all even, and then bind them up above with a bandage, and put on your crutches well made above, if there is no abscess or swelling
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put on something soothing to the abscess, which will soften the swelling, and leave it untouched for a few days
Then strain upon your thumbs, and let them be half the length of a broad cane resting firmly, or of the kind made from sticks, or of barley straws, and let them be as follows:
But it is necessary that the thumb which you put on the fracture be thicker and wider than the others.
And be as long as it is necessary for the little finger or the great toe Then strain upon the thumbs as you did before, and then bind them with a thread conveniently, as you did in the first instance on the fracture The closer it is bound, the less.
And let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and be of hemp.
For if the thread is thick, as I would like works of fools who make their knots like twisted linen threads, this is a great error, for the knot will not be even if it is too subtle, and it will hold only if there is between the thumb and the index finger some space.
If the patient is scorched by the nails after the stretching of the limbs, if you put on stockings of linen or coarse cloth, so that it does not bleed.
When the wound is with a splinter, and the bone is fractured, I will tell the cure of that later.
And the wounds which he cannot restrain must be stripped off from these bones to break them first in order. For if the limb is large, I will not put in stitches until after five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the wound coming out;
and thus the manner of old bandaging to restore a fracture, dislocation, and torsion:
and take flour that is held in the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and make this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it. This is the common manner of bandaging that restores the fracture in various positions, and even for women and young children, because it is neither too tight nor too loose
Other methods of treatment restore fracture, dislocation and torsion. Other methods of treatment restore fracture, dislocation and torsion: barley, lentil, alum, saffron, Arabic gum, mugwort, and vinegar in the amount of X times three.</start_of_turn> Myrrh and aloe, in the amount of five times three.</start_of_turn Mustard seed seven times three.</start_of_turn And make a powder of them, and mix them with egg white.</start_of_turn If the complexion of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth more than many homes.</start_of_turn>
Other methods of plastering that are worth for torsion.</start_of_turn> Pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З. Take mugwort and vinegar, at ten parts; and aloes and salt, at seven parts. Juniper berries six parts Juniper berries ten parts, and grind them well, and mix with water or egg yolk, and administer.
Another method of treating joints and bones that have become loosened from their sockets, and relieves pain, and strengthens bones, and breaks down swelling: Take fresh linen, and moisten it with oil and broth, and put it on the wound
These treatments do not restore health, but are good for relieving post-cautery pain, and bones properly relieve the pains.
Another method of treating bones that have been fractured Pren feuille de figuier sèches, et feuille de pavol terrestre, et broie ensemblé, et fais emplaustre.
Another method of treating is to restore the fracture of the bone and to diminish the remaining post-cautery swelling. Take dry fig tree leaves and terrestrial chamomile leaves, grind them together, and make plaster.
Grind them, mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, soak it with moist coriander water or water, and use it
Other methods of restoring the limb are more forceful than the first, when an abscess hardens during restoration of the limb. Take root of vismalve, linseed seed, marshmallow, quince seed, violets and chamomile flowers, of each kind an equal part Grind them, mix with salt water or sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest
Ypocras in his book does not put anything on the broken limb to restore it except for some wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be between two things not too soft not too hard.
And it seems Galen recommends placing something dry and warm upon the affected limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense and the like, as we have said.
Other means of immobilizing that is worth for lesions and pain: Other means of immobilizing that is worth for lesions and pain: take mugwort and chopped onions, or poppy seeds, and beeswax, mix them evenly, and grind them up, and make plaster of it and bind it tightly.
And then loosen a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, that the bones are not fractured in their place; otherwise loosen by hand day and night. If pain comes to the limb, or swelling, rest or move slowly; if you delay, and loosen it, and bind it up again immediately
put on a lighter drape, and a wet sponge of sea salt, and immerse in water, and elevate the limb until the swelling ceases and the pain is relieved; Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, soak in water or oil rose, and bind up with a knot, until you are sure of the afterburn of the cautery.
And rest the inflamed limb, and if it swells, then begin the ligation again, and a little displacement, and do not strain it more than necessary; Until it is healed.
If you see that the abscess is inflamed, swollen, red, and painful, and that it returns again after you have placed it and bound it, as you did the first time, then you must repeat the procedure.
And if no improvement appears in the limb for what we have said, if you must remove the dressing after three days or four, or five or seven; Never leave it for twenty days, according to what we see, until the wound has healed, and approach the joint slowly over the wound
When he has received more restraint than before, and engrosses his flesh, as I have said before.
and if you see that his limb is drying out more than usual, do not permit that nourishment should come from nourishment alone; it is necessary to give him warm water, every time you loosen it, and this every third hour, and cut a vein every fourth hour
for in this work, indeed, nourish the limb well and quickly restore what the fools make fall, that restore the limb violently
it is wrong, and if it is urgent, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it violently.
Many ways of breaks are, and various figures, and the causes are diverse;
For there are fractures that are made by percussion of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all the way up to the syphus which is the socket of the bone, as if made by a saw or an axe. and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
Or the spear pierces the bone from the inside outwards, and is called this kind of fracture "absolue".
And there is the wound of these two fractures, great or small.
And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or split of the bone, or dislocation of the shoulder or fracture of the bone, or other similar things.</start_of_turn
And if there is a burst vessel, which approaches the gut that is adjacent to the bone, or it is on the bone, this wound is great or small.
And if the wound is sutured in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the split is small, and for this reason this is called a "capillary" fracture
and if the wound is made or by cutting with a knife, or by a thorn, or by something similar, and it causes the piece of bone to enter the hollow, and the limb is bent like the cauldron when it boils If between the teeth.
And this often happens under those who have or chew moist bones, like children's teeth;
and often results from bites of various kinds that split into small pieces like stars; I will speak of it later.
And we know of all the ways of breaking due to the subtraction above them, the inquiry into tentatives, and the corrupted flesh which is above.
The capillary appearance is known by that which when we have discovered the bone, and we wipe on it, if there appears a black break.
In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient’s condition, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes to become pale and flushed, and other similar things in various situations, if you cannot do otherwise
If you do not see an imminent mishap, and you hope for health, if so, commence the treatment.
When you come to the aid first, and it is in sweat, if so, it is necessary to obstruct the bone before the fourteenth day over the muscle that you must support.</start_of_turn>
If it is in this state, if you haste to obstruct the bone before the seventh day over which the cloth of the bone is corrupted, then comes the accident that we have said.</start_of_turn>
And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the skin that covers the brain, you must cut off the fractured part immediately
and take hold of the patient’s head and uncover the bone thoroughly in every way possible, and if blood comes out from uncovering the bone, or from a wound, use what is necessary and soak the wound with oily cloths And keep the wound closed until the swelling subsides, and be sure to drain blood; Then begin to set the bone in place, and this is done in two ways:
The first method if the fracture is close in front, and this is the shape
And then there is another fracture more extensive than the first.
The second method if there are several different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and iron-like
And gently support it, that you do not bruise the head
And if the bone is tough and hard, if you must pierce to set it, even though you administer splints, do not pierce through the bone beyond the test, and should have under the point a margin or circle, that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone;
And you must know that many die if the scapulae come into the place of the bone ends, if you have filled them up to the test.
And that is the form of three ways of testing.
The quality by which to perceive the broken bone is that you place one finger on the bone and press two until you are certain that the bone is pierced;
Then put the finger back in another place a little later, and do everything around, and close the gap between the fragments of the bone as skillfully as possible, and gently, as we have said, until you have brought the bone to your hand, or to any instruments that you may have like tenailles, pins or sutures
Leave the brain and the jaw untouched.
And when you have grasped the bone firmly, and treated, if it is possible, restore the fragment that is loosened from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more tense and slender than the others.
And if it loosens no small bones, no nails, if the bones rest lightly on other instruments; Then treat the wound with sutures and bandages as we have said.
And another method of work is like the Galicians do, which is more common. And the voice is very strong, and that is its word It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, either where it is fractured or broken, so that when you have uncovered that part, put on gloves and grasp the handle of this incisor lens, for this is its form:
And do not cut from one side, but from the middle of two ribs, so that the cut reaches the bone.
then hold a little mallet above, so that you can easily break the bone and take care of the clot that is below;
if it is close to the bone, if you break it slightly, because we must break it properly without fear.
And if a bone breaks without piercing the skin, it is only slightly fractured from above; there are small pieces [of bone] which, if necessary, can be removed with a rasp of various sizes, to bring about the greatest possible healing, according to the work and the nature of the fracture.
If there is a great deal of razing beforehand, and after that more subtly, and it does not cease to do so until it is well done.</start_of_turn>
In these other small cuts and breaks, you must bring the cause according to its place;
and this is something that is not reported by him who has studied in this art
and if the scab is discovered, you must take one bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound Then take another bandage doubled in two or three, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first bandage. and make it lighter than you would like, so as not to press too hard on the surface, then give him another linen, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound in place only.</start_of_turn>
and leave it for an hour or two, until the swelling of the wound has subsided, then remove it, and give him medicines such as elderberry root, oatmeal, and incense powder, and an astringent; and similar things.</start_of_turn
and grind these things into a powder, and put it on the wound, and give him other medicines as before, with a bite.</start_of_turn>
And keep that the wound is perfectly closed, neither leaving it open nor letting it gather pus, for when pus gathers on the brain membrane, if it breaks and bursts, it causes great harm to the patient.
for when one puts on the side of the jaw any biting thing, if it does not desist downwards. Beware then, if no other misfortune befalls the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt or suspicion.
And if the swelling does not go away except by the medicine that we have put on, if it has strength, if you can take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one drape of gum, and put it on the jaw; then you must manage the healing in the way that is necessary, as long as he is well.
Never break the two parts of the nose, or one of them only, for these are two bones;
And thus the cartilage is brittle, and does not break easily, unless it is forced to bend or twist, and then it is whole again.
And if one of these two parts is broken, if you drink a little wine or open the wound, and put the broken piece back into your index finger and the palm by forcing, until it returns to its natural shape. Do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the limb and cannot be brought down naturally, as is often the case, you must assume that the limb is fractured at the root of the bone like the head of a club.
And if the break is of two parts, do it again, and hurry to restore the first joint if you can;
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation of the wound has subsided, then bind up the wound at the head of the bone, if the break is in one part.
Or you bite at another part, if it breaks there; Or you bite at another part, if it breaks there, and the teeth are so wide that they fill the holes of the gums.
And they say no restorer should mill the tents in the burrow, and die every other day. I do not think it is good, but it is right that they should be soft in confection of egg yolk and flour dust Then leave the tooth until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
And never put goose feathers or pins in place of teeth, and if there is sulfur cloth around, and it is held by the break, and blows on the patient among; or make him do what you see
If blood clots come to the surface while you are working, if you put some lint or gauze soaked in rose oil, or some alum, on it.</start_of_turn
And if the afterbirth does not come, if you put on plaster by default, of oatmeal flour and incense powder, confirmed with egg yolk, then put on light covers, and do not bind me more
And if the bone of the limb breaks but is only slightly fractured, and is broken into small pieces, if you have suitable instruments for this, then extract the fragments, close the wound, and treat the surrounding tissues with oil and poultices.
And if there is no visible wound on the limb, if you treat the pain, and apply ointment, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
When the mandible is fractured without any wound, and there is no fracture displacement, and the fracture is not displaced too much, except for the curvature inwards, if one knows it lightly
It is proper, if the fracture is in the lower part, that you bite your thumb of the affected limb in the patient’s mouth.</start_of_turn And if the fracture is in the left mandible, if you hold your right thumb of the right hand, and hold the fracture lightly, and support it with the other hand in front, and make it even.</start_of_turn
And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in .ij., if you must administer extension of .ij. parts, as long as they are even.
And if movement of the teeth comes, or swelling, if strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerate and put on a double drape. And put on a great sponge well made, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on to the bone that you put in, and command the patient to rest, and eat soft food.
And if you see that the figure is changing, if the pulp comes loose at the third joint, and then reset it to its place. And put on plaster, with powder of almonds with abundance of eggs or flour of linseed, after that you have put on the cerate.
And put upon the wound a linen bandage, and if it bursts open, and the patient remains quiet, leave it as it is until it heals; Often it heals in three weeks.
And if postmortem comes, if it is as we have said many times before.
And if there is a break and wound together, repair it so that no part of the bone remains exposed; if the bone is slightly bent, cover it with covering instruments.
And if the wound is narrow, if it has flared up as required.</start_of_turn>
And when you have boned all these fragments, and there is no more displacement, if the wound is wide, put on appropriate dressings to protect the wound, as long as it is necessary.</start_of_turn>
The forcele breaks several times in front of the shoulder, towards the armpit, and the fracture is in three positions:
or it is fractured and broken in two places, and there are fragments, and it is the lightest to restore
Or there is a break with wound.
When there is a break with a wound, if there are two attendants, one should hold the limb that feels the force of the break. and the other extends the head towards the part;
Then set the break even, so that its formation is as it should be, and there is neither swelling nor bruising
If you must extend further, put a round ball of lead or lint on the patient’s shoulder, and make it large as needed; And extend and hold the force with your hand, so that you can make the break even as it should be
If you do not manage to push back the head of the shoulder, because it comes out of its socket, you must know that the patient lies groaning on his belly, and put a cushion under the shoulder blade, that is, the middle rib, and support the shoulder from below, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then address the fracture to your shoulder, and if you find debris there, if you can, make an incision above.
and draw out the fragments lightly, and if the bone cannot reunite by any means, if the pulp has gone from one of the incisors that you have done; but put the forceps in place, for to hold the tissue in place.
and appear like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be as wide as it can be, according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work;
and there are two holes, as you see, and one is large and the other is small, as is the fracture of the wound that you made when you treated the bone.
And when you are certain of the depth of the wound, if the wound is small, or if you doubt the depth, if you employ the dressing and bandage, as much as is necessary.
If there is moisture in the wound, if it is oily, apply cloths soaked in rose oil and balsam, and wine, and put on top.</start_of_turn>
The stiffness of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is that you put on the bone the plaster of fine powder and egg yolk, and put on soft dressings above, and put a sponge below the socket if you need it. Then take a very broad bandage of a palm of good size, then put on two layers of dressing and plaster it on Then take a staple of about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is resting on the edge. And place the heel on the trochanter, and turn the bandle on the collar, and drain the right hip, and drain the left hip. And retain the thigh part, and when you see that the ligament holds the trochanter in place, and you clearly see that the heel does not move from the greater trochanter, if you rewarm the thigh again, and when the thigh is released;
And make the patient lie on his back, and put under his buttock a little cushion to lift the shoulder up. if you align the fracture of the scapula with the alignment of the shoulder, or if you bind the arm to the collar, and do not release it until it is well healed, for up to 20 days;
Then resume the support, if you see that it has shifted, hold and leave it as it is until it is restored.
and it is restored in eight days, and in less than a fortnight.
Then resume the displacement, if you see that it is necessary, and hold and leave it in place until it is restored; and it is usually restored in about 26 days, and less in most homes.
There is no break or wide displacement of the bone, and only by force can it be moved;
if it appears according to the figure of the fracture, and is repositioned according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can
then put out the limb powder with millstone with abundance of egg white, and bandage lightly, and put on a double dressing then put on a broad and soft cushion, a cushion wider than the shoulder, and when the cushion is set, do not let it rest on any part of the shoulder, if you use this braid of hemp, so that the cushion rests evenly
And then the stretching at the whole great bend firmly, so that the limb does not move from its place, and look at the mark of each joint.
And every time that it quivers, if the stretching is made, and makes the limb equal to its place if it has gone out of its place, and lies the patient upon his chest;
and the dislocation is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And when this number is completed, if the limb is loosened, and the pain and swelling have subsided, because it is not a bone that has moved too easily.
And if a piece of the bone bends forward, and not a little, if it persists, and the bone, do as we said at the bursting of the forceps to calm the abscess.
And if a piece of the bone bends forward, and not a little, if it persists, and the bone, do as we said at the bursting of the forceps to calm the abscess.
The limb is never broken in a thousand, but this is often the case. but it often breaks suddenly.
When it is broken in the middle, if it declines downwards, and causes the patient great pain, and there is no marrow, and swelling, and by chance vomiting blood, and opens the marrow cavity in the broken bone, and all this is felt.</start_of_turn>
And if the patient lies prone on his back, put a cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades together, and unite the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and slightly force them into place until the bone is set as it should be.
Then place on the wound dressings and stamp below the tip of the collarbone, or some other soft substance, and cover with a bandage, and bind over the bone break, so that it does not move. and twist the limb round at the back, and hold it firmly, and give it time for the swelling to subside, and if it relaxes, do it again
and if it comes loose, by corrosion or by inflammation that comes from within, or pain or swelling, if you are hasty, do not delay, loosen the wound and scrape away the pus, and address the cause of the trouble
Then restrain the shoulder and hold it steady until it is healed.
Of the fracture of bones
The wounds that break the ribs only come forward in the buttocks and at the head of the thigh, and do not protrude except because they are slimy; and he feels well at the interrogation as two should.
The restoration is when you put the fracture back in its place as it should be.</start_of_turn And then put on the dressing and bind it with an elastic bandage if necessary.</start_of_turn
If the ribs break downwards, if he feels great pain and itching, like with pleurisy, for the bone is touching the gut and the limbs are pale, vomiting and spitting up large amounts of blood, which is a grievous disease, and the old men have put great effort into it
And if any of those who say it should administer food that swells the belly, to push back the pangs of hunger.
We do not do this, for after these things have been eaten, they do not go away unless they have already begun.</start_of_turn> And if they have already begun, if they are well.</start_of_turn>
They say that no one has ever seen a wound there without causing harm, for it seems to be the reason; All that remains is doubt that the vacuum does not pull out the superfluous matters at once by the arrangement of weakness.
And they say that on must not cover the limb with coarse linen soaked in oil, but put on bandages between the ribs to measure an even inch of the circumference, then either cure with the cure for pleurisin, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that points the toe, and there is doubt in the patient, if it is to be suspected that the fracture is broken, and if it is necessary to put in instruments to hold the fractured limb;
And then one must break the bone again, and treat it lightly, and then suture the two layers of the wound, if it is large, and bandage it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if there is pus coming from the wound, put on damp cloths soaked in rose oil, and put on the limb.</start_of_turn
And cure while the limb of that which you must incision, and be without any surplus on the coast, or it must, as long as it is sane.
And also at the spine of the back
If this happens to anyone, and you know whether it will heal or not, take care if you see his hands softened and limp and dead, and do not move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, do not feel it.</start_of_turn>
The veins that are deadly in many situations, if you move them and feel well when you stretch and pull them, the veins that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured, if you put on cure.</start_of_turn
And if something similar comes to the spine of the back, and you know if it is sane or not, if you take care that the pieces are softened, and that the accident which is in the hands and on the back is from the wind and the egestion of the will;
And when it is softened on its belly, if you make an egestion of the will When it is soothed on the back and it vomits, it cannot be stopped Wounds that are mortal: If he does not toil diligently in his treatment.
If this mishap does not occur, then the matter is lighter.
If he does not toil diligently in his treatment, and if there is an abscess at the root of the hair, if you put oil of thistle or oil of rue on the spine, until it is calmed down.
Then put on a soothing and drying dressing, and bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed
If the bones break, if you can cover over that part quickly; and fix the bone, then gather the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and cure it with ointment until it is healed
And if the head of the shoulder is broken, which is called the "shoulder dislocation", if you have twisted your left hand pouch and placed it equal to the other hand at your side, then place the support and stay on, if you need them.
Then strain it, and if there is a displacement of bones, if it remains so, and the bone, cure the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the fracture of the thigh bone
When the thigh bone is broken, and if it happens, if there is no sign of improvement at the head; then it is long and declines downward, and brings pain to the patient, and swelling, and breaks the limb.</start_of_turn>
And the restoration is that if you extend your hand over, as long as you are over the breeze; and the sleeves which are the breeze and the form of the limb.
and if the breeze is at the shoulder only, if put equal this breeze, as long as it is in a natural position.
And if the fracture is long, or it bends inwards, if you make the patient sit on his belly, until the restoration of this fracture is apparent.</start_of_turn And when you have put it equal, if put on the socket, then put on a cushion of cloth or wool, and restrain the breeze, so that it does not move;
and hold the limb steady, so that the limb is even And instruct the patient to sleep on his side, or on his back.
and if there is a spasm of the limb, do not touch it, until the spasm of the limb is appeased, and put on what we have said before And then return to the restoration, and tighten if it is necessary, if there is no mishap.
De la brisure de l’ajutoire.
The assistant is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, it must be restored in one of two ways:
One is to take one fist full of myrrh, according to this fashion
And hold the two thumbs and two fingers upwards, and hold the patient above a seat;
Then gently pull down the arm until it reaches the armpit, and there put a fist of myrrh, then do not put any weight on it or the attendant will extend it backwards.
Then he puts his thumbs together in his hands, until the thumb returns as it should.
Or the other method is to hold the patient’s arm at his collarbone, and bind the hand to his neck, and command the attendants to hold the part above the break at his hands, and the other to hold below at all the joints, and extend the chest towards the part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, if you strain the limb from the shoulder to the elbow, and from the elbow to the wrist, extend the thumbs of the assistants to their part.
And if the thumb is close to the head of the shoulder, if you must, put one thumb in the middle of the elbow and the other towards the wrist, from the thumb.
And thus if the thumb is towards the wrist, if you must, put one thumb lightly and gently, with some force, until the thumb is even on the palm and on the wrist
Then put the thumb even, if you can, and hold it, if necessary, for fear that the thumb does not come back
And if the thumb comes back, if it does not stay put, do not hold it for more than seven days, put on moist linen and rose oil, until the thumb is calmed down
Then the strain, and the manner of straining if you place the dressing over the wound, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
Put the bandage on, and strain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, without any hindrance, or without moving the bones.</start_of_turn>
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, if you use staples, put on the wound a wider and stronger staple than the others, and put between the knuckles two staples at least one inch apart; and let one staple be as long as to pass through three knuckles.</start_of_turn>
Then strain on the staples, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less loosely.</start_of_turn>
And if thou seest the elevation of the shoulder-blade, and the stretching, as we have said, in the course of restoring the limb, and thou doubtest the incision, if thou leave it until the seventh day, as we have said;
Then look carefully for three days after the limb has been restored, that it does not swell or cause pain, or that the swelling does not return to the limb because it is too taut. If the sufferer persists, as we have said.
And if no such things occur, if thou must remove the dressing only after three days or more, and the patient lies down on his back and rests his hands on his stomach;
put on the shoulder-blade a cushion of plain wool equally, and look for an hour or two to see whether the limb remains broken or whether the ligaments are softened
If by the power of medicine, and you do the meat which we have before us, in part as much as the meat is at the first degree; and when it starts to recover, if it be large
It is customary that the shoulder and limb should be taken back in 40 days in all cases and then one must loosen and administer poultices and medicines for the limb in question
And if the constriction is painful and embedded, if it stays for more than a day or two, it must be loosened.
And if the fracture of the arm is displaced, leave it undisplaced for one day or two months.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two “humerus,” of which one is small, and is that which supports the pouch;
and the other is large, and is that which is below the little thumb;
By chance, the great bone breaks alone, or the small one, and by chance the wrist is fractured together.
When the small bone is fractured, restoration is easy, and the healing is quick.</start_of_turn>
When the great bone is fractured, if the healing is bad, it is more painful than when they are fractured together.</start_of_turn>
If only the small bone is fractured, if the limb is slightly extended and put in its place.</start_of_turn
And if it is the great bone, if you must extract it, do it with greater force.</start_of_turn
Hold the thumb above the wrist, and grasp the pouch of the hand higher up than the other, and the small one must be lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arm over himself, and the thumb in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient does not feel any pain.</start_of_turn
Then extend the minister's arm at the shoulder to the outside of his hand, or at I liien, and one other minister at I other at the base.
And then he sets the eye equal, following its best form.
And if in the burst (dislocation) it breaks into pieces, if you place some support in its place, and if there is no slippage that pricks like before, you shall not be able to restore it to its place; then leave it as it is and support the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the forceps the wound is open, as I have already spoken to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration blood comes out from the abscess, if glue I drape it with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too soft; and tie I drape it above all subtly, until the abscess blood vessels are calmed down
and then put on the cerate, and put in the plaster of the powder of the mill with abundance of eggs, because put the staples, and let the staple of the forceps be firm, and one space wider than the others;
and the wicks which he must have six stars or arms in more diverse positions. or if the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two.
and is strained more above the fracture than elsewhere, and all the days less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of this chapter and the cloths that are above the fracture are soft and moist, and are neither hard nor rough
and the cloths that are above the fracture are soft and moist, and are neither hard nor rough and the thread, which is strained, should be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said
And rest the limb and the tendon afterwards for some days. And if other bad accidents come to the limb, if there is itching that comes to the limb, you must raise the limb with warm water, until the itching is appeased.
and let the limb rest still.
And then resume the traction, and if the tendon is softened and the bone is loosened, and similar things, if necessary
If you take care that the nourishment does not come to the limb because it is too stiff, then you must soften it somewhat, and leave it for a while, until the nourishment returns, and then strain it.</start_of_turn>
And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, keep it detached for twenty days.
or when it hangs limp, then he must hold the hands to his throat, and let his collar be even, and guard against movement and vomiting, and sleep on his back;
and the swelling that caused this fracture will disappear in XXX days or in XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the compositions and temperaments of the virtues
Of the breaking of the hand
The nails on the back of the hand, and we have had two breaks there, often comes from fractures, and comes no more than once or twice.
and when the limb is broken or twisted, if he must believe that the patient walks crookedly, and stands directly in front of him equally
then put his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them even with the eyes, until they are well joined
and put on the plaster and the supports, if the incisions do not come out, then I put in a splint as much as is necessary. and be enveloped in linen cloth.</start_of_turn>
And if the fracture is at the edge of the bone of the limb, if you make a ball of gauze and command the patient to hold it against the fractured limb.</start_of_turn Then I bind it with a long bandage, and put in a splint as thick as the limb, and bind it firmly.</start_of_turn
And if the break is outward, if you command that you place a pin above and another below at the joint, so that the hand is overextended and straight, then hold it firmly around the hand, and staunch the bleeding between the two.
And if the fracture comes neither from above nor from below, if it is a pouch, if I put it even, if it is right.</start_of_turn And with the pressure, strain the limb, and if you see that it will not move, put in a small right pin to raise the swelling, and do not move it.
And if the swelling is like others, as in the index or any other, if you put it even and hold it with the sound thing that follows or you bind them together while holding it, when the movement is finished, or you put on a pin, as with a pouch.
Take care in restoring and disposing of the burnt tissue, and cure what comes from it, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often fractured, and one can see it when it is twisted before and behind
and the restoration is when it is bound under the swelling, and the other below And the patient lies on his face, then extends his chin slightly so that his tongue rests evenly on the part below.
and this is when the fracture breaks through the bone.
If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, if one of the tendons below the bulge and the other below the fracture.
And in the same way if it is close to the knee, then either the tendon is detached from the knee, or the lower extension is stretched out;
then put the eye of the bone even with both hands, so that it is in its natural position, and then put on the dressing and bandage, and do not move from this place until it heals
and if there is excessive swelling, if you leave it calm and come back to your work and your treatment; the limb is made in a crooked way
It is proper that you wrap around the armpit, a bend of hair doubled in two or three, and hold the superfluous hair, then stretch the limb until the nails reach the root of the nail, and keep the thread long between the elbow and the limb, from below the elbow to above the wrist;
then stretch the limb and the elbow the hair, and put on the bandage, and put on the bandage on the bone of the limb.
then use the remaining cloth between the limb and the elbow of soft wool to make it even, and start to bind in three tours or four on the armpit; and the more you go up the armpit, the less you will strain;
Then take as I said two fingers that you have placed between the leg and the hip, and join them with three nails that are below, then raise the head of the nails to the foot, as long as you see below the bone.
Then hold it tight, if it does not move from its place, then leave it alone, and do not cause any further bleeding or swelling or anything similar.</start_of_turn> And if there is swelling, if the dislocation is addressed, and you address this which has come, as we have said many times.</start_of_turn
And if there are pieces of bone that prick, if you cover it well, it will not matter.</start_of_turn And if it will not stay in place, if you must cut the limb and drain it.</start_of_turn And the treatment is as we have said, when it is sound.
And never is the limb broken in this way that we set it, as in the shoulder and the arm;
although in the setting that is done it does not please the patient.
And sometimes the bone is restored in a day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Hair that in the groin has often burst, but it falls many times.
And if it breaks, if not a mere tear, or an opening, and there is pain at every wound, and sense of pain, and this is well known.
And the setting is done so that what is round is put back in its place, as long as it is put together firmly
then put the bandage on, and put a round cushion in, if you must, and hold it firmly, then reward all the precautions that we have said before, as for cautery and other like that if there is any other accident that may occur when it is sound
And if it is set right, do this: put the rounded peg back in its place until it is well assembled; then put the stuffing in, and put a round pin in if you have need of it, and hold it as it should be held; then restore all the arrangements that we have mentioned before, as for example incisions and other similar things; if you put in every mishap that it should be put in, as long as it is healthy.
Hair that is on the leg has two bones, of which one is called the right non-muscle and the other is called the fossilized.
And there is often a fracture with the arm, and because of this the restoration is just as it is with an equal arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are fractured together, if the limb is broken throughout.
And if a subtle bone is broken, it will twist forward.</start_of_turn>
And if the big bone is fractured, if one sees great pain, and it is well seen; it breaks apart
Therefore bring extension, and put it equal, and tie the laces equally;
but always if the fracture is serious, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less strong and lighter; And do likewise according to your skill.
And when you have finished your work, if you take two strips of cloth that are long enough to circle the limb from hip to knee, and bind them from hip to ankle;
then wrap the limb with two bands below and above, and bind them in the middle, and with this binding the limb will not droop to the right or left, and that is good.
and no one should administer any medicine that has a long duration, and if there is cloth, and you put it on the limb to prevent movement, and do it quickly in the fracture or wound
and move the limb around to see if there is any other fracture or accident. If the wound is clean and healthy.
Of the fracture of bones due to violence.
At the ankle, fracture does not arise; but in bones of violence, fracture never comes alone, and there must be two together; and there is no other cause of death but certainty and fear.
If there are broken bones that are seen to be moving against each other, if you put the limb down on the earth as though it were falling, and then put the limb back onto the ground, where the bones were lifted, then press down until they return to their proper place
Then place the dressing and bandage on, and put on a small weight on the limb at two fingerbreadths, then support the limb steadily, and when you have bound up the limb with cloth and other things as needed
And when two or three days have passed, if the limb is loose, because you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.
And if there are any broken bones that you have restored, as we have said above; Then set the bone with a pin according to the length of the bone, and make the hole a little wider, and then put on the weight that I mentioned above, and support steadily
And if there are two or three, or more, break [the skin], and put upon each two stitches according to their quantity, covered in one layer of linen, and strain the wound from below the heel. And keep upon the head of the wound against the belly of the heel if it is held firmly.</start_of_turn>
Remember also the other things I have said about other breaks, as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn> And treat each case as it should be treated.</start_of_turn
of the fracture of the clavicle bone
When the bones of the nature of a woman are broken, if you make her sit enlarged, then incline towards the back part and be held behind.</start_of_turn
Then fill in the belly the nature of the patient's condition, and put in as many as I stop.
Then empty the woman, and keep her back and belly firm, and then leap the cotton, as long as it comes to the limit of the nature, and returns the bone with the stop.
And when she vomits, if she has grasped the cotton, and when she has vomited, she returns, and thus make seven days or more If she is restored the fracture, and if you see it, take a bladder of rhubarb, and bind it to the belly with a bandage, and squeeze the whole bladder into the nature Then blow in the bandage forms, until the bladder is expelled completely. The nature will return the fracture.
Then fill it with cotton and leave it untouched for days until it heals
And when the bone of a man or woman is fractured, if you restore it as we have said concerning the thigh bone;
and they are not hidden by those who put their studies and their work into it, and they understand my book.</start_of_turn>
For the fracture means in many ways the right way of restoration:</start_of_turn> except that.</start_of_turn>
In the limb, when it is fractured, take a gooseberry and hold the limb.</start_of_turn Then cover the wound with a cloth, and leave it for three days or until it is healed. And it will be completely healed.
Of sudden with wound.
In the case of sudden fracture with wound, even if it is great, as with the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or the like, that it be set right now, as the symptoms which we have mentioned bear witness.</start_of_turn>
And if the wound is well closed, if the vitriol has been retained, if you have nothing else, then repeat the restoration of the fracture in this way, or that way, for if it does not come, after these measures.</start_of_turn
And if the swelling comes, if you must leave the restoration until the swelling has gone down, as long as the swelling is appeased, and do not touch either the third or the fourth part, for you will otherwise cause a worse accident.
And if a bone breaks suddenly, it appears above like a wound discovered, so you must cautiously hold it at a slight extension with your hands.
And if the swelling does not disappear so that you can make your hands even, if the disease has this instrument which is of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its size is according to the extent of the wound. and because of this, when it grasps three or four, according to what is necessary in the bruise of a wound
and be round and somewhat thick, that it does not cause pain in the compression on the limb at your work, and be thick in front, and large from the middle forward, thus:
It is called "palainche", because it must be placed on the head of the visible bone And the limb has once again, as it returns, and be equal the one meets the other. And if the break is slight and the instruments cannot firmly grasp the bone, if you must cover the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have possession of it.</start_of_turn
And if you are unable to restore the limb, as we have said, if you see that the edge of an instrument, or an incision or suture, approaches this, at your peril;
Then restore what is displaced from the bone with rough grasping and little pressure.
And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, it is because the marrow is not in its natural place.
If you do that, then moisten it with black styptic plaster, and hold it in place; and do not put anything on the wound except cerate or anything else that may cause oil, for it will cause putrefaction and corruption
Then administer stars when you have restored the limb, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the covering around the wound, according to the extent of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with a fracture
And often have I seen that this has happened to fools, that it has caused the patient to become mad or to die or has caused no less damage. Or it is more flexible and softer than the other breaks.
And if the wound is small or large, and you doubt that the treatment will suffice, as we have said, and you feel pain in the limb, if it does not suffice to put it on stars; but cover it around with soft cloth, instead of stars, and bind it tightly
When you see after one or two days that the swelling has gone down at the wound, if the one you put on previously has fallen off, put on a healing bandage, as with a bandage of four herbs and similar things.
And it is necessary that you bind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be supported in a gentle way that the limb can move slightly without causing discomfort
If the limb persists, and cannot be reunited at its proper place, because there are small bone fragments, it is necessary that you close the wound with great care, and remove all these fragments which cause pain
If a fistula arises in the limb, or other sign of corruption, if it is possible to cure it, according to what is written in this chapter above
When the bone is broken and is opened on the limb, as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if I do not treat it, for often death comes from this, but I leave it as long as it bleeds
By chance, after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you wish.
and if you do not wish, leave it alone.</start_of_turn>
Many times after the brightness of the breeze, even close to the joint, the good thing is to see the shape of the limb.</start_of_turn and by chance cannot make the limb move naturally.</start_of_turn
Therefore take care lest it be fresh.</start_of_turn if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acacia, and similar things, that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stiff wine or with egg white or with vinegar.</start_of_turn and puts them on the knot in dumplings, and holds them well, and does not loosen them from the hands for days.
and puts them on the knot in dumplings, and holds them well, and does not loosen them from the hands for days. and then dislocates it again, and starts another one until the swelling is bony;
or you strain on a piece of flesh well made; for the owner of the flesh is that if it is bony all the swellings under the limbs
and if the swelling is already converted into hardness as much as stone, and it is necessary to pierce, if the swelling above is large, and make the apparent surplus disappear. or you leave it without any support, until it is bony, and cure it until it is healed.
Weak limb after care
When the fracture has been restored, and remains fixed after the limb is weak and limp, if there is any cause for it: or because it was too tightly bound and was not allowed to move as much as it should have been. or because there were too many bands on it, and it could not move freely. or for excessive bruising. or because of too great a movement, which did not suit it or because there was too much blood in its substance, if the limb is weak.</start_of_turn>
and the treatment is to give the patient rest and make the limb firm, until the swelling is reduced in it.</start_of_turn> And he gives a bath, and he does rejoice and is merry.
Then he puts poultices on the limb, so that the poultices attract at the great nourishment, and the swelling often becomes acute, until the nourishment returns to the limb. and returns to its natural shape.
The limb is twisted after the seizure. When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the limb is deformed, although it does not lose its natural work
since it is not believed that we must break the limb anew, and many have experienced this in our land;
these works are blamed, and there comes great evil, and by chance the patient dies
Whenever swelling and pain are fresh, if it is caused by hot water, or soft herbs are boiled, like rue malve, and radish, and honey, and similar things;
and you make an emollient plaster, like aquaint well made, and you take the bruise of rue malve, and confirm it with fat of gelatine or oil of alum, and make plaster over it.
or you take fat figs, and grind them with dung, and similar medicines that appease the swelling.
And never is the bone loosened by continuous rubbing and length of time with moist hands. Or else be moved to the limb from the armpit hour.
And if the swelling is thickened and hardened, like stone, and the bone needs to be cauterized, if you cover it just up to the bone, make an incision slightly deeper; And put cushions and study in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to no more, if you can now restore the limb to its proper position.
For if one delays, if by chance one should reset it, there will be pain in the limb;
because it is painful to move it when it is swollen. causing great swelling and other pains;
although when this happens, if you make the patient comfortable, then leave him, until the swelling subsides;
then the limb will grow hot and oily, and move gently, and cure each limb as it comes into its place
And I have ordered the chapters concerning dislocations of the shoulder joint to the end.
When the jaws are loosened and the dislocations are done twice: Or they are a sign of bony lesions of their limbs, and soften a sign. Or they are completely loosened, and hang towards the side, and cause him to spit out saliva from his mouth that he cannot hold, cannot close his mouth, and engulfs his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, if it returns by itself in several positions.
And if it is whole and accompanied, if you must certainly hold it firmly, and do not delay me;
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and look with your eye at the pocket of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts and the other two hands are displaced, to put them even
And command the patient to soften his teeth, his jaw, and move them all around. And behold the eye that is beside the pocket, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And if they are gripped, even if both jaws are together, if they arise with hot oil, as long as you keep them slightly soft;
do not force the return, as we have said before.
And when they are returned equally, and the patient’s mouth is closed well with soft pressure, put upon moist cloths soaked in rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with thread;
and keep the patient lying on his back, and his arms resting between two cushions, so that they do not move forwards or backwards, do not attempt to force it, but take hold of the teeth lightly, until the pain is gone, and close the jaws
Then let him swallow what he wants lightly, and do not make him open his mouth to swallow or drink, until his jaw is well oiled and healthy.
If the teeth do not return to their place at a single hour, and are not otherwise converted, fever and nausea will ensue, and sometimes vomiting of pure bile.
When you see this, then know that it is a loss; And many times death comes to him who has it, in eight days
The forceps cannot grasp deep within without causing displacement, and is worth nothing when removing it, and it is often felt.</start_of_turn
And the restoration is that the patient lies still on his back, and extends his arms; Then press the limb near your thumb, and it will return
Then put on the bandage and bind it well, and restrain it;
And whoever is beside the knife must not loosen it Leave it be, and if it slips once, if you keep it in its place as we have said.
Then put on the support and the bandage, and strain it, and command the patient to rest until he is well;
And the same must be done with the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place
Of the dislocation of the shoulder.
This must be done three times in order to restore the shoulder
One must grasp the bone at the armpit towards the elbow and the third at the base of the shoulder bone and in this way it slips upwards; thus it is done
And do not damage my behind for the scapula, and do not damage my insides for the nerves.
And many times damage the bones towards the buttocks, even those that have little flesh, because at these leaps there is great suffering;
For those who have enough flesh, these leaps are painful and return painful.
And sometimes there are percussion or fractures, and the shoulder is inflamed by a thick abscess, and care must be taken that it is not dislocated by this.
You must therefore suspect it until you are certain and then begin treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation is when it is tilted towards the buttocks, and you will find between their deviation the difference between the diseased and the healthy limb and at the head of the shoulder there will be a hollow, and the bones of the buttocks will touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were a knot And he cannot move his hand back to its place, neither by any movement.
Likewise, if it has been displaced upwards, if not hidden, because you will find it clearly on examination.
And this method of dislocation is not strong enough to return it, when it is new, or when the patient is suffering
The method is that the physician grasps the painful limb upwards, then puts his thumbs under the armpit, and grasps the joint forcefully upwards at the root The physician grasps the limb and extends it upwards, because he puts it under pressure; If it comes to pass.
And if it does not come as we have said before, if it is necessary, the patient should be bathed in warm water. and the doctor should administer a soothing and comforting treatment, such as a decoction of alum, fennel and meadowsweet in warm water, and be given to drink.</start_of_turn>
then should the patient be laid on their back, and put under the buttock a cushion of linen even, not too soft nor too hard, and put the eye on their thumb on the cushion, and keep the shoulder joint firmly in place, and treat the hand of the patient.</start_of_turn
and another assistant should hold the patient’s head still, if it does not move downwards.</start_of_turn the shoulder will be restored immediately, and if you see that it remains dislocated do it in this way:</start_of_turn
And it is that you make yourself present at home which is greater than the patient. And be right next to the patient’s side, and hold the patient’s buttocks away from the belly, and keep the belly raised, so that the patient hangs down from the head. And another attendant should treat the patient’s hand behind the belly And if the patient is too weak to bear any weight, if he can manage without anything heavy, the dislocation will return immediately.
And so we must keep it in another way:
And it is like holding a long cushion in the earth, from which the head of the shoulder is just as round as a ball, and is neither too thick nor too thin Then put the patient’s hand under the patient’s armpit, but leave a cloth under the patient’s arm, and the patient’s arm should be long from the elbow
Then let the patient extend his hand forward from the other side, and the joint will return to its place instantly.
and if it does not return by these things that we have mentioned, if you do this cure: take two thumbs and three fingers wide, which have the head bent inwards to enter under the armpit, like this
then hold the shoulder firmly wrapped with a bandage so that the patient does not feel pain, and then put it under the armpit of the patient
extend the arms above the shoulder, and hold the shoulder at the arm, and the hand at the head of the hand, and put the hand on the inch of a thumb wide, and let the other hand hang down: The jointure reva ens maintenant.
And when it is restored, in whatever way, if you put on his seat a ball of wool as big as an egg, put on the plaster bandage of powder of wheat, with incense and balm of egg, on the whole shoulder and around, then strain off the seat immediately, and turn the limb on the bandage, and embrace the hand at its collar, and keep the hands still.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to keep it moving until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly.
then move it again after five or seven days, and move it and if it is stiff and is not softened, it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the joint is forced out of place by moisture or for some other reason, if you can, administer cautery three times over; as is done before or alongside cautery.
If you do all of this and it still slips after seven days, and the limb does not hold, and cannot lift the upper arm, then the nerves of the shoulder are compressed or stretched or softened.</start_of_turn and the dislocation will never be fixed in its place.</start_of_turn>
The dislocation which is towards the elbow, and the arms, or behind, if it is done by impulse, and extension of hands, and is administered with another support.
and cures as long as it is sound.
If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses the limb many times, until the grief is relieved and returns to its former state.
If after healing the limb grieves and becomes stiff, if the patient uses the limb many times, until the grief is relieved and returns to its former state.
The joints that are loosened by blows are loosened at points, and return at points.</start_of_turn>
and are loosened throughout, both front and back, and the dislocation is not remedied, for it is seen and felt well.</start_of_turn and is loosened according to some shape.</start_of_turn And when you join the painful limb with the sound limb, if you see it clearly visible.</start_of_turn> For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, touch its shoulder at all.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary that you first stabilize it before and after the hand is placed back, for if the hand is placed back while the bone is still moving, this would cause great pain to the patient.</start_of_turn
And by chance it cannot be brought back at all, even when it is at the back. It is better than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death ensues from it.
When it is restored, if it is like this that we can bring it back, extend your hand with both hands over it and its arms are spread out, and the hands down towards the navel, with the thumb and little finger bent inward, and hold the joint together with its joints bound together, or at the root of its bone, until it returns to its place
And if the dislocation is in front, if it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and hold from the root of the bone that is loosened.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer great extension;
and two assistants extend the limb and support it with two assistants, so that it does not move at the extension;
Then turn the shoulder away from the chest, and when you have enveloped a double-length and wide bandage around it;
And when you look at the joint with the hand, if the oil of any kind has been applied to lubricate the joint, then hold the joint together until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn>
And when it is in its place, if you put on dry plaster with egg white, and tighten it, and hold the limb to the chest of the patient, and leave it there for a while, and then take it off.</start_of_turn
And if the joint is fixed in its place, leave it alone and leave it.</start_of_turn
And if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plaster and the bandaging, and leave it like that until it is firmly set.</start_of_turn Then he must be loosened.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, if you bathe and rub gently, and press until it is eased; or you put on the joint a fat mutton marrow nail, then leave it in for a day and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or bathe; and when it sweats, you wipe the joint gently, then put the nail back on, and then enter or bathe. and do this two or three times, until it is healed.
and if you see, put upon a moist foulard soaked in urine, and strain over it;
If it returns to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the limb is loosened, and the return is easy, more than the others. However, it is necessary to reattach it immediately while it is loosened, even if there is swelling or if there is an opening
And it must be repositioned if you place the affected limb on a table, extend the limb, and look at it so that it rests with the palm against the surface of the joint, and hold it until it returns
However, note that you must watch if it is truly back in place; Then put the patient’s hand on a table at extension and flexion And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and I will look and put his hand on the appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, if the strain of supporting muscles relaxes after the incisions, and you leave it in its place, let it return naturally.
And if it cannot bear it, and you do not wish to put it back in place after some days, the joint will become stiff
and causes no further pain for the patient as long as the limb is soft, and cannot move anything at all therefore if nerves or arteries are cut.
if there is no other remedy except to drain by cutting with fire, this case is not worth anything.
When the hand is at rest, if you put on the bandage which we mentioned earlier, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it be.
If it does not move well and there is no pain, if the swelling is of warm water, and you rub it until it is healed
of the dislocation of the shoulder of the hand.
Sometimes the forearm must be drained downwards, sometimes at the back of the palm or belly;
Therefore, hold the shoulder firmly, and keep the dislocation in your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the shoulder, and bring it towards the part where it is joined.
Leave it for two days, and then put it even again;
And do not bind it, as we have said, but leave it loose, and let it move freely, and bind it again.
Do this often, until it is straightened, and do the same if it is loosened at the root of the arm, doing as you have done before, until it is healed;
And do the same in any other case.
From the loosening of the shoulder joint at the back.
When the shoulder or neck joint is loosened, or there are several such loosenings, if no cure is found, for the patient’s death is imminent.
If the signs are that the blood vessels flow in the opposite direction, do not hold it, for many times it is softened in no limb, or the two thighs or two arms or one foot.
And many times it moves the scapula to its three parts.
that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez".
the cure is that if it comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for all that
and that which comes from fear or percussion or similar things, say the old physicians in great words, or there is no benefit at all;
but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways
I say that in the scapula that comes before the elbow, there is no healing at all
And thus also when it comes directly from two sides, and one cannot cure the fever except for that which comes from behind, as I have said.
And that the patient is stretched out on his face in one league even, and has strained his eyes from him, that they do not close.
Then take I cushion at the head in the earth forms, and I another has pieces, and I bind one limb outside the patient’s buttocks, and I another has haunches, and has knees, and has ankles;
and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other at the pieces, among the two cushions
and be well closed, the cushion as we have said, and the patient puts his palms on the spine forms, until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a thumb three fingers long, and hold the skin taut over the part, and let the patient lie on their side, and hold the head of the thumb taut over the part, then put the middle of the thumb over the spinous process. put the thumbs side by side over the other head of the thumb, and press firmly, until it returns to its place.
and if you see that it is fractured at the wrist, do it at the nut that turns at the hand. And put two stitches at the head of the patient’s arm from a great hand, and over the pieces two others, and have between each stitch, a suture and a piece of cloth, a palm of spice long;
And every time a tick is pierced, or the thorn is twisted, and the hairs remain firmly in the earth, if they do not move.
And between two hairs there is one hair that has twisted, so that the thread that has twisted is twice that of one palm of its length, because of the thorn.
Then the thread which is among the armpits towards the thorn at the head, and the other thread towards the pieces towards the other thorn, and the hairs of the servants twist their thorn at the whole thread, and the master puts the thorn even as we have said
And when it is even, put on a dry dressing with a lot of eggs, and then press, and then support with a tablet of three fingers’ length, which covers the area of the swelling and the sensitive part of the spine, and then bind with a thread, as we have said, and use the patient some nourishing herbs until they are healed
And if nothing comes to an end of the sickness, if it is necessary, administer soothing and calming medicines, with the exception that we have mentioned before. And never administer on a piece of lead, and never does its appearance appear behind the shoulder bone at the back, and take care that this is not a dislocation. And it is the bone that opens, for which we must not presume because of this there may come death.
The joints of the thigh and the shoulder only come loose with dislocations, not as with others
and the joint of the thigh is loosened in three parts: Within and outside, before and behind;
More inward it goes, the more it swells outside; and more inward it comes, the more it unvalues before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when you join the painful limb with the flesh, if it is longer, and opens more the patient’s joints than the known, and cannot double his elbow at the fire; And this is the cause of the displacement of the shoulder socket from its place, because the head of the humerus comes loose from its socket
And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
And the signs of that which happens in front, if it is well supported, are that the limb is well placed according to the completion; Thus do not double the elbow in pain, and if you see it happen, do not do it again, but retain the urine, and swell the groin, and when he goes, it passes over the heel
And the sign of the one who comes to the rescue, if it is that he cannot extend his knee, cannot double it, and that this limb is shorter than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated at the root of the ribs.
When this semblance of dislocation is repeated, if it is an ancient dislocation and remains fixed according to its nature, there is no cure. and I do not know that there is any presumption.
And in such cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are three ways of dislocation, if you hurry to rejoin the limb, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; it will return by itself, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not return in this way, if you must, apply four strong fingers, and stretch the limb with two hands, or with one hand that is bound to the groin And another minister extends his hand downwards almost as far as his elbows, then grasps with a loop of thread the hair on the buttock; and another holds the head of the thread there.
and extends upwards and downwards together until the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended
This method of extension is often used as in three similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.</start_of_turn>
If not, if you must put an antidote for its appearance
When the dislocation is loosened, if you must that the patient rest on his chest, then put the thread on the root of the buttock, and the limb which is below the ankle, then stretch the thread upwards towards the ankle, and downwards towards the heel
Then take another assistant and grasp the great head of the shoulder of the ailing person, and extend it towards the front. if it returns to its place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you do not tighten it in this method as we have said, if you must, bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong thread over the two toes and over the two knees, and let the limb be extended two fingers more than the others
then either suspend it above the head of a pole, or on the ground two long arms;
and command one minister to grasp the head of the shoulder, and that another minister hangs alongside the patient, who graspes the shoulder, because the joint is now coming back together quickly
And when the dislocation is urgent, if the patient is conscious, as we said in the case of gout, and is strangulated by the limb on the painful side and on the thigh also.
then put two fingers, one at the head and the other at the toe, and grasp the thumb between the thighs of the patient as in the shape of a cross and lay moist towels around, so that it does not bleed the patient, then extend the thumbs and the ministering hands towards him, and I look with my eyes that the dislocation is even with his hand.
If it comes back, it is well.
If not, put on the table as we have said in the previous instruction, and press on it with our hands as we have said, and keep the patient lying on the edge of the table.
And when the dislocation is before, if it is possible to extend the painful limb immediately, and as I have said; put your eyes on the painful area above the limb, and press with the other hand, and extend towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is upwards, if it is not possible to extend the patient horizontally, do not lift them up from the earth, but rather keep them as they were when they were dislocated upwards, as we have said above concerning the two fingers. And either hold their face, and the limb is extended as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table. It will be known when the patient extends their limb, and they will be even; Then join the thighs, put the cushion in, and strain with a bandage, so that the limb does not move; And rest for three days or four, then loosen, and put the cushion back on
If you see that they are even, if strained, as before, leave them for three days.
Then loosen it, and leave it alone until the limb is comfortable.</start_of_turn>
of dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is loosened in three ways: namely, by pushing inwards and outwards, and backwards.</start_of_turn>
Do not pull forward.</start_of_turn>
And the sign is that you order the patient to bend their limb at their hip, and if they do not rise to their hip, their limb is loosened.</start_of_turn
Then restore them all if you make the patient sit upright, and extend their limb if they can, and put your hand behind their back and put their hand on your knees.</start_of_turn
Then take your thumb and spread your palms apart, then fold in the two ribs of your thumb forming; And another minister extends his finger, as long as the thumb returns to its place, and the sign is that it has firmly grasped its limb slightly
and put the dressing on, and make the limb move towards the thigh, and bind them together firmly for three days or four, and then take it off
and do not move the patient any more, until the limb is comfortable.
And if the limb is not at a point, if the dosage is strong, as we said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
of dislocation.
The talons never is esteemed, neither fully dislocated, but always partially.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and try before at the part where it is devalued:
it must be gently returned, and it must be gently extended with the hands when it is only slightly swollen
And when he is completely drained, if you order the patient to sit upright, and hold him firmly by the leg under the ankle;
then take hold of his foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, and then extend it upwards, and hold it firmly in place;
do it twice as we have said, with a slight pull and stretching the foot.
if it returns, it is well done.
otherwise, start the work again, for it will return.</start_of_turn>
and if it cannot return, order the patient to lie on his back on the earth, and fix his heel firmly on the ground between his thighs, and cover him with a blanket, so that he does not move the patient.</start_of_turn>
Then grasp the limb with the minister, and another minister extends the thumb of his hand or on the wrist, which lies on the collar of the limb. Then extend the fingers of the ministers equally, and grasp either above or below the limb between the joints of the patient to hold the patient when stretching
Then place the thumbs equally on the dislocation with the hands, and another minister grasps the limb firmly at the shoulder, and the dislocation will return immediately.
And when it has settled, if you put on the plaster and stamp on it, and strain it, and grasp the thumb to the limb, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that they do not stretch too much
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the limb is comfortable, if the strain is gone
Then loosen the third or fourth rib, and tell the patient to abstain from food for three days. and if he goes before this end, it is not certain that he will not vomit again.</start_of_turn>
If he persists thus, if you must restrain him, as we have mentioned elsewhere, until he is well.
then. When the bones are dislocated, if you can extend the limb well, it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is not in the buttocks or at the hips, if you must make the patient sit on one leg or on the ground, with the limb resting on what is open from these joints, then press on the limb until it returns.</start_of_turn
When it is equal, and there is no opening, if you put on the limb a stool two fingers wide, then press until it is strained, and leave it for three days, then loosen it.</start_of_turn And rest it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
This excerpt describes various medical procedures, including cautery for hair removal, treatment of dislocations and bleeding, and setting of dislocated shoulders.
When a wound accompanies the dislocation, and it is seen to restore itself, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not cautious in the treatment, and if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful, compassionate, and timely, do not attempt it;
and at the beginning of the treatment, use calmants and stay with the patient, until you see hope of healing; and when you see hope, if you now reset the limb in its place, and the abscesses have vanished;
and when the limb is set, if you administer calming poultices and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with desiccant poultices.
And if with the dislocation there is a break, and the bones are loosened, if the bones, do as we have said in simple ailments.
And keep away from danger, as I have said, for this will bring you misfortune according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body.
