O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.
In the first source sentence, the text seems to be discussing the limitations of knowledge in ancient times and the importance of understanding the science behind it. The phrase "fort leu peric la sciencia de lu" translates to "with great concern for the science of ours," suggesting a deep respect for the understanding of one's time. The phrase "le vistigi de lu es ostat" translates to "the vision of ours was left," implying that the knowledge of ancient times was preserved, albeit in a limited manner. The phrase "e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics" translates to "and we did not make it bigger than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients," suggesting that the knowledge was not expanded upon but rather preserved in its current form. The phrase "les qualus mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio" translates to "those who destroyed the most and sought to fix those errors and misconceptions," implying that the knowledge was not perfect and was subject to human error. The phrase "entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu
This sentence seems to be discussing the importance of maintaining an orderly structure in a treatise, as well as the need for clear language and concise expressions. The phrase "yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio" translates to "you should maintain that order," suggesting that the author believes it is important to follow a specific structure in writing the treatise. The phrase "e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra" translates to "and because you come to those forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work," suggesting that the author is referring to specific tools or methods used in the treatise. The phrase "cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu" translates to "as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of you," suggesting that the author believes that clear language and concise expressions are necessary for the reader
In the past, the cause for which an artisan was not skilled in surgery, but in our time, it is because the science of medicine has not yet been fully developed, and the actor does not know that the body is subject to the laws of anatomy, which Guillaume discovered when he knew the functions of the members and their forms, as well as the connection and separation of those parts; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their kind; and of the pulsating veins and quiet veins, and of the locations of the deposits of waste.
For that reason, says Iposcar, who is his name, not in the small work, but rather in the art of medicine.
As I have already said in the introduction of this book, what we do not know about anatomy is not due to ignorance of that science, but rather because of errors in it, which have caused many deaths among men, as you have seen many of them, who are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a physician observes a woman with a gout attack in the thigh, and notices that several arteries in the thigh are flowing with great pressure, causing the woman to die suddenly among her friends.
I saw another physician who believed that a man's gallstone was causing his condition, and the gallstone was large, and he came to me and said that the gallstone had been passed through the urethra, because that man died on the third day.
I then called for help to remove that gallstone, and I saw that the large size of the gallstone and the position of the thigh under the patient had caused her to die.
I saw another physician who was paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and he went to a black trap that was on the thigh of the patient; and the physician, being ignorant, opened the fracture, over the blood, am pulleys and astels am strong strain, and did not close the wound.
When the movement follows the will of the doctor, and the relief, and the pressure according to the joints and commands that he desires the limb to move; and it is estimated that the thigh and foot are in position, and then the pain appears.
And you called upon him, and the movement of the limb appeared, and there was calm and relief from those pains.
However, I already confirmed that the corruption was confirmed in the member, so he could not stop the spread, and it continued to spread through the member within that bad position of the thigh.
I saw another doctor who performed an incision for corns, and it ulcerated after a few days, within which the cunning of the lord of the foot was revealed.
The cause of this pain is that the cramp is purely due to melancholic humor, and it does not come to the relief of the lord of the foot, but rather it is in the member that suffers from all that has been hosted.
Therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation I made on you be divided into two parts: one is in the operation associated with health, and the other in the work in which I hold in the greater dispositions.
When I have already existed here in this free place where there is an operation in which errors and fears occur; because it is necessary for you to guard this and lay that, so that the people do not fall back on speaking and disobedience to you.
And then remember your own weapons with care and the protection of God, and your wounds with difficulty and closure.
And use the best way through the grace of God to lose one's life and praiseworthy succession, and lay the terrible wounds of difficult cure, and keep your weapons ready that you may fear, so that you may not escape from your faith and name: for what remains is for your glory, and put up with everything in the world and beyond.
Many false things have already been said. "Do not treat wounds badly, because evil men do not speak the truth.
And you have already had to do this free work three times.
Begin the division of this free work, and first of the first part. The first source sentence translates to: "The first chapter of the doctor's entry into the foot, in the forms of the instruments and the methods of cauterization, and that which is necessary for the operation.
This line can be translated as "The division of the second part." However, without additional context, it's difficult to provide a This line can be translated as "The second chapter, of drying and perforation, and of ventilation, and of plagues, and of extraction of tumors and similar growths, is divided into forms of instruments.
This line can be translated as "The third chapter, of restoration and displacement, and of cure of bending and similar growths; this chapter is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
This line can be translated as "You ask about the quality of the advantages of that cauterization and of the notes of it, and in what collection it is prohibited to cauterize." It seems to be discussing the benefits and drawbacks of cauterization, as well as any restrictions on its use.
Therefore, it is said that the quality of the cauterization and its effects are long and prolonged, subtle yet clear, and secretly magical; and many wise people have spoken about it, and those who disagree with them are few, and for me, a little of their words suffices to fear a long duration.
I say that cauterization soothes the entire complexion universally, which is made of matter or its matter, except for two complexions, which are female complexions.
In the female complexion and dry matter, decadence occurs; others say that cauterization is beneficial for that, and the others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for malnutrition, which is due to its quality and dryness, since nature of the fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that malnourished female complexion and dry matter are cauterized and dried to be healed.
And I agree with those who say the opposite, that through cauterization, it is beneficial in all female malnutrition and dryness that appears in the chests of men, where when you compare the chest of a man to the focus of his humors, the chest of the man becomes less.
And you say in the sermon of that, I have already experienced this in my own life.
But mayhaps not that comes to mind about that which has been expropriated and exercised in the capital of cauterization for the exercise, and knows the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of their malnutrition in their meats, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
In other complexes, there is no cause for fear, and particularly in wet and muddy diseases, such as gout, all doctors are accustomed to this, and do not deviate from the common practice of cauterization in these cases.
Indeed, children, that the secret of healing by cauterization is in the fire and its goodness, they say that cauterization is the most important part of medicine, as it is simple, the effect of which does not reach other parts of the body except for the part that is cauterized and not the other parts adjusted only for small harm.
Less the effect of burning medicine reaches the parts of the body that are not cauterized, and more it comes to the difficultly treated part of the body and more it hurts.
Indeed, the fire, due to its sublimity and goodness, does not cause harm unless it is superfluous. And we have learned this by experiment and long experience in the study of the art of truth; and therefore you are excused for the length of this sermon and if not for the freedom of this moment in your secret of the fire, and the quality of the operation of the focus in the body and the expulsion of the excrement that expels the diseases, the philosophical sermon is demonstrated, which sharpens your mind.
When it comes to wisdom, sons, that they do not follow the time in which it is most convenient to perform cauterization and wait for the best time from first aid.
I believe this is a passage from a medieval medical treatise discussing the use of cauterization in various situations. Here's my translation:
When joint pain is not alleviated by your own hands, or, sons, it is not valued as the common people and doctors claim, it is because the remedy for that disease, which is cured by cauterization, does not always work immediately, and time is needed.
The reason is not that they are treated for this, but rather because cauterization does not work in the place of medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the humors that cause the pain to come.
However, cauterization is often used over medicine because of its superiority in value, virtue, and the greatness of the Lord's service.
It is possible that the disease may return at some time, according to the complexity of the disease and its location in the body, and the virtue of the patient, and that which is prepared in the heart of the patient by the addition of superfluities in the patient, and that which has been acquired in the patient through his adventures and likenesses of those causes; but if the disease to which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a small member and few superfluities and humors, then it is possible that in it there will be no return of the pain, rather than that it happens in little.
This is a common speech that describes cauterization as an ancient remedy in medicine, and it is called a surgical procedure. However, I do not fully understand what is being said here, as the language used is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I believe that the author is trying to convey that cauterization was not a cure for all ailments, but rather a method used in conjunction with other medical treatments.
This sentence seems to be saying that the cause is in contradiction to what I understand. I believe that the author is trying to convey that cauterization was not a cure for all ailments, but rather a method used in conjunction with other medical treatments. The author also mentions that some medicines do not cure certain diseases, and that cauterization is used as a last resort to alleviate pain. This sentence seems to be saying that I should understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not based on my understanding of the common people and many doctors. The author is trying to convey that cauterization should only be used as a last resort when all other medical treatments have failed.
This sentence seems to be saying that the ancients believed that cauterization was better than using iron, and they did not discard this method only because of the inequality between gold and its substance. The author is trying to convey that cauterization was used because it was the best option available at the time, despite its limitations.
When deciding on the location for cauterization, ensure it is not too close to the body, as it may not be absolutely effective. If you have already done so and found that it does not work, try another location in another part of the body, and cauterization is better than a sword if you have the means; however, when you perform cauterization, use gold, not iron, as it is more suitable for the pain you want to relieve, and prepare the ferrule; and if you place it over the ignition point with the gold on fire, and there are some layers in the focus, the artificer will have to work in that area.
And therefore, for cauterization with iron, you must gently and precisely place it on the operation site.
And you have already ordered this capital in cauterization according to the capitals, and ordered those of the foot within the feet, so that the patient can easily understand which one he needs.
The first capital.
This cauterization confers humidity and coldness on the accident of which its causes are due, causing soda and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the thighs and ankles, and numerous sleeping, and toothache and gout, and universally of all maladies that come from coldness, which are paralyzed, sore, apoplexy, and seem like those maladies.
The form of this cauterization is this, which first commands the patient's leg that it be evacuated from the body by surgical means, either three or four times, according to what is seen in the virtue of the leg and its age and its habit.
And then commands that the patient lie down with his head on the table, and places his hands over his eyes to prevent them from coming out.
And then pauses the head of the patient's hand on the tip of the nose between his fingers. However, as the said place is said to have been done, it should be attempted there, and you should ignite the olive-colored cauterization oil of which this is the form:
When that is paused over the location without any resistance, with your hand that descends, it is held by the tie that tightens little by little, and you rotate that.
Lift your hand lightly and look at the location, and if you see any part of the skull exposed, then as much as the amount of errors, raise your hand, and if it does not turn the iron that is on top of it, take another one from that, if it is frozen, enter that if you have seen the skull as I have told you to you.
And take a small amount of salt and dissolve that over the location and stir it for three hours.
Then pause on the cotton that is wet in the border and stir that over it when the skin of the fire is destroyed. And treat the location with tetracycline cream when it is healthy.
And it has been said that as much as the Roman plague opens the throat, so many bees get into the chest, for which it is better and less hurtful.
And they say to the ones that the cartilage in the bone is burned inside and it is held with the cauterization when any part of the surface of the bone is burned.
When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Other doctors use a blunt cautery that is applied to the skin, and it is inserted into the strong bone part, and this is the method of alopexy: They estimate that the vapors of the head will escape from that place.
If the wound is kept clean for a long time and it is cured when it is solidified, then...
I have not seen these specific types of cauterization before, only in the case of fearful men; and that is why, if you want to improve your health, when you can, let the head be divided by a solution of continuity of the skin as has been testified in other parts, and especially when the head of the patient is of natural nature.
The first type of cauterization is less safe and better for you, and from that I believe that it is better for your health.
Next chapter.
Of head cauterization.
When in the entire head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and it is located in the pelvis prolonged, and one uses thorns, spikes, and purgatives, and plasters, and gauzes, and bandages, and garments, and semblances, and more so if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not cause inflammation in that particular cause; and the head of the pelvis is not of great origin in its nature; and there is no swelling or great flesh, one should consider that the cauterization was done with another cautery further on. And if it is necessary to cauterize it over the crown of the head with a cautery that has already been placed within the umbilicus, when the abdomen is divided. The abdomen is incised and the quantity of bone that has been found is revealed, and it is cauterized with a cautery in the part of the head closest to the Vas, — and that location is where there is a ventosa. And afterwards, and you leave the wound, and do not discover the bone, for the pelvis suffers greatly from a different kind of pain than that of all other head cauterizations.
You should direct this cauterization to that location, where the cauterization is done on the corns of the head and the occipital bone, and a subtle cauterization is made on the same location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.
Of non-ancient cauterization.
When in the part of the head pain occurs or is felt within the wound, and if it is necessary to remove from the head a foreign body that has been introduced into it, and to maintain the other cure, which I have told you in the cases of diseases; and do not neglect, cauterization on it can be done in two ways: either with acute medicine burning, or with iron.
Many cauterizations with acute medicine are done when you take a heated iron, and hold it over the edges of the wounds of the caps. And you should pay attention to the location of the pain in the temple with a lancet that has been inserted into it, entering where it is located, and entering where it is hidden.
And apply pressure on the affected part that is crossed by the constricted vessel, and leave it there for three hours; and then cut the vessel and remove the plague, and place the cotton submerged in the border of the wound that the location has.
And then care for the affected part until it is healed.
And if you see, apply some medicines that I have written in the book of burning medicines in the aforementioned treatise.
The cauterization is made with irons for cauterization, and this is the form:
It is called a nail head, where the top of it is shaped like a needle and has a curve, and in the small part of it there is a pocket.
And place your hand over the painful spot, and remove the iron little by little, and roll the fire slowly.
And if the quantity of iron that is burned by the particularity of the codon is slow, and you remove your hand, and you do not allow the artery to be burned that was previously, in order that there may not come a flow of blood.
When the doctor applies a warm poultice of salt to the affected area and leaves it there for three days, and then replaces the poultice with a new one every day, and cares for the patient accordingly as they become healthier.
If you see, make a point on the extremity of the intestine according to the cauterization, and keep an eye out for the cutting of the artery in this unusual way.
Capitol quarter.
Of ancient emigrant cauterization.
When you cure the ancient emigrant according to the previous treatment and what has been said in the divisions of the diseases, and do not take advantage of the treatment, and sometimes for the disease that does not suffice what has been said in the first cauterization of medicine or the cauterization of fire, you cover that you ignite the cauterized intestine at the location of the pain, or that is the longest of the line from which the largest part of the gut comes; and then slow down your hand for a moment and press it firmly over the incision of the artery and pass it through to the bone.
The first source sentence translates to: "However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is harmed by chewing, and that the lizard is not hurried and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not expand spasmodically.
If it is about the custody and caution of the flow of sinews from the artery that is blocked, then in the beginning of the artery there is fear, and especially to that one who does not know that it failes and does not study and does not practice; and therefore the operation is left in the beginning.
And you will remember the regimen of the flow of sinews in case of an accident to the artery according to the right hand side, in the location of this free one.
If you see of this malady that it does not satisfy this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that part of the head with the leg in the middle of the arm as they have encountered, and cure the plague within when it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that has said in the capital of stretching of the artery with an artery cautery with two points, and this cauterization is better and less inconvenient.
Capital.
Of the cauterization of the pains of gout.
When in the gout there is pain from cold and it is cured by causes lactic and by the other cure that I have said in the division, and it does not worsen the pain, then you should administer the cauterization, and this is the one that I have called the point, of which this is the form:
And if a point is made on the thigh, and it is placed at the edge of the entire auricle, as a wheel rolls around, or in the circuit of any example if the pain is in any part. Then use the cautery on the edge of the auricle as little as possible, so as not to damage the location intended for it.
And if the cautery is made on all parts of the auricle, and it is removed, and the wounds inside are cared for once they are healed.
Capitulum.
Chapter.
The first source sentence translates to: "Turpentine stool that is cured and treated with cauterization is not only of the species that come through the rectum, as has been said in the divisions of diseases.
This sentence appears to be discussing a specific type of cauterization, which is a medieval medical procedure that involves burning a small area of skin with a hot object to treat various conditions. The term "esquiva" could be translated as "evasive" or "avoid
When you treat that part of the scalp with dandruff and flaking, and if it does not improve after your treatment, then you should cauterize the thigh three times: first with the tip of the cautery, second at a distance of one finger's breadth, and third at the junction of the two lips.
When stopping the cautery for the opposite side of the malady part, four mollifications do not seem to be in the part that appears healthy.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part of the cauterization at the end of the extremity of the swollen finger, and on the other side, the length of which is the same as the length of the said pous, and then your hand pauses until the quantity of the matter of the specified part of the codena is burned.
And this is the form of cauterization, and it is special for the barber, the form of which is set on the table. However, it is less subtle that this one has a few less eyes; and cover that a little more than the excessive gluttony has.
And apply the remedy to the place where this is done, coming after the process when it is healthy.
Chapter 7.
Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is and the treatment is done as they have said and no confirms your medicine and the thighs do not have fever, then you cauterize that part four times: on all the corners of the head; and on the head, you cauterize where they have said; and on the crotch. The hand of the cautery is made according to how it is described.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is less dry; and it is properly cared for as you proceed.
Capitulum VIII.
Of cauterization of forgetfulness, it is made by flax.
Cover them with large and small poultices and pills that are useful for the thighs at the beginning.
And take away the head of the thigh and place it on the center of the described plaster in the chapter of the plasters.
And put that on some wounds, as that is the hand of the cautery. And do this according to those measures that I have already said.
And if for those who are cured, do this; and otherwise, make three cauterizations on the same part of your head, which are going down from the top of the head to the top of the neck. And put between each cauterization the largest part of that, and properly care for the cauterization as it is proceeding.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
After treating the affected area to make it healthy; and if the cautery is not effective, then use olive oil in that form as was given.
The given text is in a language that combines elements of Latin
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in English and appears to be written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a possible translation of the given line
This line appears to be a continuation of the previous one and is not complete. However, based on the context, it seems to be discussing the process of cauterization for head wounds and the use of cauterizing instruments such as cauters, cushions, and other tools. Here's a possible translation:
If it is necessary in the malady of softening of the chest of too much flesh and the chest is hard, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries on the spines of the back, and often with cauterization within which is crushed by the end of the rib cage, and lift the other arm. And if it is cared for inside that it becomes healthy, and this is olive cauterization.
Chapter X.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not cauterized the epileptic unless that epilepsy is by cramp.
And therefore you should change the brain of him at the beginning of the year and at the beginning of another cure, and in the division when the malady is great and the tolerance of the exceptions of the medicines.
And if the child who did not suffer from the medicines, then you should administer guarssants and stimulants to the changed serum, and for this by several days, for the good of the vessels.
And if you cut the head of the patient, and then cauterize that part with a cauterization iron in the previous location of the head, and another cauterization in the occipital region of the patient, and over each corner of the head, you can cauterize. If the patient is strong and enduring, then you should cauterize those parts that I have mentioned, which will have practically and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And the cauterization is olive according to what has been said before.
If the patient is young, then you should pause the subtle cauterization according to this manual.
Capitol, Chapter XI.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted and largely flaccid, then you should cauterize those parts that have been mentioned in order to have parallelism.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity and declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then you should give him this that modifies the brain of the patient according to what has been said before in division.
And cut the head of the wound, and make a clean incision around it, and then pull it slightly towards the middle of the head.
If the wound is sixty centimeters long, and it is held tightly from all sides.
And place the liniment; and it is worthy of being bound with woolen threads. And heat that over the fire, carefully heated to measure, which the patient endures when they are in it. And place that in the middle of the head of the patient, and let it enter until it is warm.
And apply a dressing to the wound once a week, or as the other part of the body becomes healthy; or if you prefer, cauterize those points with small burns according to the size of the wound, unless you have a properly ordered cauterization: this is a specific type of cauterization that moistens the brain equally.
And place that bandage either around the border or in the gray matter of the quail.
Chapter XII.
When the cauterization of water descends into the heel.
When you are declared the beginning of urine in the urethra by the senhals which I have mentioned in the division, then start and give in burden to the thigh at that place where the head of the penis is located, and keep it for all humidity.
And keep that swelling wet in the bath for several days.
And command that the head of the penis to be shaved, and cauterize that part with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and if it is the beginning of gout in two hills or one, then cauterize on two flaps if it is the beginning of urine in two hills, or on one flap if it is the beginning of urine in one.
Incise all the veins and arteries that you have left in the abdomen; and those cauterizations are in that line in the templates.
And keep away from the fluids of scorbutic when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluids of scorbutic, stop the application of that part for any medicine that you can possibly find.
And when you come to know the quality that is extracted from the arteries and the abscess of those and the caution of the fluids of scorbutic,
When some people are cauterized on the neck, two bones are produced at two points of the cauterization.
Capitulum XXX.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and appear in the veins and arteries that are located at the base of the head and it is observed that there are too many twisted flaps, then cauterization is performed on that part with a pointed cautery that has been found in the capital starting from cold water in the eyes, and two cauterizations are made in the neck at two points and two cauterizations are made in the neck at two points. And if you need to add, then cauterize that on the entire length of the horn above the tip of the small cautery.
Capitulum XXXIII.
Of the cauterization of nasal odor.
When you medicate that which has been said in the division and do not profit from your medication, then you should show yourself and give to the patient's thighs three kneelings; and remove the head of the patient, and cauterize the am cautery with the olive cautery. When it is necessary to apply cauterization to that pointed cautery, apply cauterization to both sides of the hairless skin over the area.
And keep away from the archery that does not burn that.
And this is the form of the pointed cautery.
Chapter XV.
Of cauterization for the softening of the eyelids of the blind.
When the eyelid of the blind is softened by malady or humidity, apply cauterization to that eyelid with a pointed cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, apply cauterization to that over the two hairs with a small one on each side of it, and make them long by the hair. And the length of each cauterization is according to the quantity of the hair.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the part of the eyelid is swollen.
Chapter XVI.
Of cauterization for the eyelid of the blind when the eyes are converted into parts of the fingers and thumb of the hand.
When the nails of the fingers are converted into the parts of the toes that pierce the finger, a cautery is applied in those with two hands, or it can be made or made with medicine as burning.
If you use fire to cauterize the part, command the patient to look at their fingers as they were before, and if they are prolonged and engulfed; and if the finger of that one needs to be cured, then stretch the nails of that finger with a needle so that it does not cause pain when they were born.
When they are prolonged and engulfed, place the tip of the patient's nose in the middle of the eye, and cover the eyes of the fingers that you want to treat, and cover the eyes as the second figure of a skull, and that is the beginning of the covering of the nails.
And place a cloth or mucilage on the finger.
And light the cautery that this is the form of the fire.
And cauterize over the figure that you have covered, little by little, in quick movements, when it is burned the surface of the nail that was like a skull, the whole apparent perfectly.
When examining the second health of the eye, you will see that the eyelid is swollen and the lashes are raised, so make the puncture in the eye.
Then raise your hand and lay it on the side opposite to the wound, and place your thumb over the edge that is exposed to the air. And apply a cure to that part which is healthy.
If the lashes return to their proper position and the eyelid is softened, then make another cut over that area as you did initially.
If the lashes are in the eyelid, then make a cut over that area where it is raised at the natural location and is not causing pain to the eyeball.
The cauterization in medicine is this that you command to the thigh where the lashes are extended and engulfed, and it should be in the form of a flat piece of paper like a mirror's frame.
And take some boiling water and add live ashes to it. And then mix those causes with it, and make sure it is not too hot; and spread that over the paper that is in the form of a mirror's frame, and place it on the other eyelid; and place the thigh in the bottom of the album, and the hand of the thigh should be at the top.
When the patient has paused the medicine and placed it on the cheek, the doctor will give a small dose of medicine, which is taken in the same way as a hot pill.
Then, when the pain subsides, take the medicine and put it in the same place as before; then, when the pain stops, wash your eyes with water; and consider if you have washed your eyes before or after the constraint of heat or cold, which is what you should do; and if not, return to the place where you did not take the medicine and do not damage your operation and do not contradict the eye.
And when the cut is stopped, treat it with the same medicine that was used to eradicate the fistula, and cure it with the same medicine that is safe or another if it is not safe.
And if it is necessary for you to do your operation, guard it with the same diligence that you have in the eye not to fall out of the medicine, and if the eyelid is softened and any cause of the tears is in the eye, return your medicine to the place where the eyelid is softened, and do as you did at the beginning, and leave it when it is cured.
This is the form of the fennel plant.
You should know that the symptoms of men vary according to their age and size, and therefore the treatment for your contraction is different.
Do not doubt the route to rectum for the one who is being studied in this work.
Capitol, Chapter XVII.
Regarding the cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you cure the fistula as they have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confirm your cure, then you should cauterize according to this method: order the disease to place the cap where it should be in the upper part, and hold the cap of the patient between the upper parts in such a way that it is not too wide or too narrow for the patient's head.
And then stop cutting in the fistula with a knife or in the scar tissue of the eye on the patient's eyelid.
And then you light the cautery that is this form:
the which is cured, how it is formed like a cane or a pen of the hand, from one end to the other, where the cauterization is made.
If you see, enter through the other end. If you want to try something different,
When it comes to treating joint pain, it is generally better to consult with a doctor or a healthcare professional. They can provide a proper diagnosis and recommend appropriate treatment options based on the individual's specific needs and
And if you open the fistula when it is opened, and between the soreness and dryness, then. If it is not opened, then open it and remove the redness of the wound.
And place your hand over the wound with the cautery that is not lit, and take care of that joint but a little of the cautery at the end of the nose, so that you do not mistake the joint and the thigh is quiet, and then place the cautery in the gray part of the nail and corrupt it.
And if the cauterization begins to enter the bone, then so be it; and otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization one or twice, if necessary; and leave it there for three days, and place your hand over the area to border and envolve it with the cautery until it is dry inside, and it becomes healthy.
If it takes more than three days and is not cured, then you should stop using the acute, corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is rough as it should be in the capital.
When another cauterizing instrument of the fistula is needed: locate the fistula and find that one, and then pause at that small opening in the subtle groove where the form of the penis is; and fill it with a quarter of a pound of melted wax; and then close it with a good retention, and do not damage the penis for so that the wax does not enter the end of that; and cover it over the end of the penis with a damp cloth or water, where four pounds of wax adhere to the fistula and heal it for wonderful cure.
If the fistula is healed as they have said about cauterization and cure, then so be it; but if not, you must administer snuff of nose and reduce the fistula to the cheek according to what is found in its place.
Chapter 18.
Of cauterization of the vaginal fissure can be done.
Masturbation causes fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat those fissures that have been said in the divisions and do not waste your care, then you should use a small cautery according to this form that has been cut:
When the swelling of the foot is caused by the subtlety of a puncture.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
When treating that wound, make sure it is properly cleaned and dressed.
Chapter XIX.
From cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When the uvula, tongue, or palate in the mouth has a sting, and it becomes inflamed and breaks, and it bleeds and forms an ulcer, and you treat it and do not overdo it, as much as possible, you should cauterize that area and not let it become infected, and you should use your own judgment about how much fire to use according to the amount of inflammation in the ulcer, and place the fire in the opening of the ulcer, and then put your hand over the wound when the hot fire touches the inside of the mouth, and on the outside; and you should care for that wound as they have told us about the cure when it is healed.
And if the abscess is healed and cured, then so be it; and if not, you must discover the location and cut the corrupt bones according to what will come in their head.
Chapter 20.
Of cauterization of teeth and mollification of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are dry, and you treat them with medicines and do not confirm, you should pause the thigh of the patient in the second position, and place the fire in the desired form, as if you were pressing the fire on the tooth and entering it with the cauterization hot, and then put your hand over the wound and a little further down that the leg is centered by the heat of the fire on the gum that has been perceived.
When you take your knife and make several incisions according to what you want.
And the patient should drink water with salt and hold it for an hour, and it may be seen that the gum is closed and the gingiva is strengthened and the corrupt humidity is dried out.
Capitulare de Cobutonensi.
Treatise on the use of cauterization for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by cold, or if it is frozen, or if it is infected, or if the medicine does not provide relief, you should make incisions on the tooth with two knives: either with a knife made from cowhide, or with a knife made from fire.
Cauterization with cowhide is when you take leather from a cow and heat it in the furnace, then wrap it around the end of the hand, and press it firmly against the painful tooth while it is cold.
And make incisions according to what you see as the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
If you see, place wool or hair on the border of that part, and place it over the painful tooth, and also place it over the heated iron that comes into contact with the cavity of the gum.
However, I believe that the cauterization is only suitable for the end of the nail or iron, and it should be done in the body of the foot, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then, light the cauterization in the form that will be used, and place it over the tooth and insert your hand inside to see if the cauterization is hot; and make some observations to see if the pain remains or on that day or the next day.
And I advise that by pressing the cauterization, the patient's mouth will open the good doorway and hold it for an hour and a half, and this is the form of cauterization.
And cauterize as you see fit, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
It appears to be in a language similar to medieval Latin and Italian. The text you provided seems to be about
When the extremities are caused by spasm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion, and you see that the digestion is only mildly affected, then you know that the cauterization has taken effect in the form of this one, and you have two ends for the cautery, so that the smoke does not reach the other end, and you place the ignited end on the other wound with a veil, and another if you wish, until it reaches the edge of the wound.
If the gout is small, then stop the cauterization according to the amount of gout, and apply it for three hours and leave it on the affected area in order to make it less painful than what it is now that has been burned.
And apply this ointment and try to put it inside if it is cured.
Capitulum .xxiii. (Chapter 23)
Of cauterization of vaginal wounds and constriction of the anus.
When humors come over the anus of the lung, and especially when it is cold, then make sure that the abdomen is emptied at the beginning of medicine with laxatives, and cauterize that part of the gallbladder in the damaged location.
And be careful not to get burned by the cauterization of the gallbladder or not burn the colon of the patient only a little.
And cauterize that part with another cauterization, you must make points on the joint of the col in the corresponding spine of the patient. The first line of the text translates to "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." Here's the translation in English: "If it is
And if you apply this remedy to that part as previously described, it will be cured." Here's the translation in English: "And if you apply this remedy to that part as previously described, it
This line appears to be a page number or section heading, not a translatable sentence.
Of the cauterization of the chest in coughing." Here's the translation in English: "Regarding the cauterization of the chest in coughing.
When the cough and chest pain are caused by cold humors, and the chest does not have a fever or chills, and it is an old-fashioned cough, then cauterize that part with two cauters on the shoulders in the locations mentioned earlier; and another cauterization at the side of the chest between two milks; and make the cauterization clavilh according to the previous form." Here's the translation in English: "When the cough and chest pain are caused by cold humors, and the chest does not have a fever or chills, and it is an old-fashioned cough, then cauterize that part with two cauters on the shoulders in the locations mentioned earlier; and another cauterization at the side of the chest between two milks; and make the cauterization clavilh according to the previous form.
If you wish, your cauterization should be made with a point on the cautery that is called a point, the form of which precedes in the pain of gout.
And points should be made inside the wounds; and it is important to care for that which is preceded inside so that it may become healthy again.
And now the cautery has three notches for each cauterization: you can make three cauterizations following this form:
Capitulare Bollandianum, Book XXV.
Of cauterization of the gout that is the head of the assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to the humidity and does not stop at the time of returning to its original position, and then it is dislocated by making a small movement so that it goes back in the same way as we have witnessed, first reducing the dislocation, and then the thighs are placed over the knee or on the bed; and then lift the codpiece that is in the part of the gout to the parts where the fingers were before, if the joint is dislocated at the parts of the fingers.
And if it is necessary to use cauterization with two heads; and this is the form of it:
And if you need to cauterize the umbilical cord that penetrates into the other abdominal cavity; and this is the figure of cauterization with four heads:
Some veins are adjusted according to this count and by which these are the cauterizations.
And then place your hand over the cauterization point, and make sure the patient is tightly attached to the bed, and the limb does not hurt for any time until it becomes comfortable.
And if the dislocation occurs in the parts above and below, then you cauterize over the muscle that is to be cauterized or the point where the cauterization is made, four times the joint is confirmed and the moisture is relieved and the patient is cured.
Chapter 26.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When pain is felt in the stomach and moisture enters that particular part of the body, and if you continue with your cures without conferring, it is possible that the leg is over the head, and extend your hands and feet, and cauterize that point three times with a single cauterizing iron: one iron on the chest for the quantity of a single cauterizing iron clavich, and two irons on the two costae of the cauterization, when the figure of the triangular cauterization appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted to make an incision.
And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two thirds of the groins of the coecum.
And if the figure of the cauterization is this form, and if you want, cauterize a large cauterization on the right side of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the circle form according to this form.
And if the stomach is cauterized at the point that is feared from this cauterization: and it is that you are on the stomach with a point according to the quantity that you want attempted, and cauterize that point of the cauterization at the points; and cure that point with the cure that was preceded when it is healed.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language similar
Of cauterization of the enemy's foot." This phrase suggests that the text is discussing a medical procedure or treatment involving the
When joint pain is caused by cold, humidity, or excessive ventilation, and the foot is not in its normal position, and the patient's malady is such that they have been told it will not be cured and does not comfort them, then you should make points on the surface of the foot with a pointed cautery, and three times over the foot of the hip bones, using the patient's weight to support the body.
When the space is the one that follows after the largest cauterization of the said part, and the cauterization is after the length of the body in the direction of the foot.
And do not understand your friend's concern about the cauterization method.
And if the quantity of water that is added is equal to the amount of the specified part of the intestine, and there is no adjustment; and if the thigh is on the feet of the patient; and if not, then the hand should be placed, which has already extended its fingers, and lift the patient's chest.
And is it possible for you to do this cauterization with a cutlass, when you have the necessary subtlety and prudence in the art?
And be careful not to process too much in the cauterization, and add the specified part of the entire intestine, which is added throughout the body and passes through the feet, where the thigh is subtle; and you know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of the wound of the patient with cauterization.
When an inflammation or abscess appears on the skin and one wishes to know if that abscess is in the skin or in the layer of clothing, if it is in the skin, the disease becomes serious and causes pain at its point of origin.
And if it is in the layer of clothing, then the pain is sharp and often wears out the doctor's patience with the cure of the patient.
Therefore, this abscess should be turned over on the shoulder; and then mark the location of the abscess that was infiltrated; and then use the cauterization that is closest to the form that was shown in the previous page. And cauterize it with that and cauterize within if the entire chain is burned, within if it reaches the hip, within if it causes infection.
And cure that by treating the other abscesses within if it is cured.
But it is not necessary to use this form of cauterization except for the one that was studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in many of those cases where maladies are known; but this one has experimented with some watched being ardent about this operation, but rather it is necessary for us to do this, and it is better.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De cauterizacio de plauresi" translates to "Of cauterization of ulcers
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit." translates to "The old cauterization methods of aristocratic physicians for ulcers are replaced by this manual, and the one you hold from the aristocratic physician's bag is a long, thin needle that has been found, and it is the largest of the kind.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas." translates to "And submerge that in oil and heat it up, and cauterize using a cauterization tool located in that place which is between the continuity of the shoulder bone and the collarbone; and two small cauterizations are made at the end where the beard is left, and two cauterizations are made on either side of the decline that is the fifth costa, declining a few to the parts behind; and one more cauterization in the middle of the pietz location, and one over the stomach, and three cauterizations on the parts behind; and one cauterization in the location that is between the two spallas, and two cauterizations on the two latz of the pietz, and then the cauterization on the parts between those two spallas.
When you do not want to pay for your medicine, ensure it is in the manifest of the work in progress.
We have already told you about some of the people who use iron cauteries resembling razors and ignite them, and place them in that location between the ribs, so that they may reach the opposite hip and be expelled without causing pain, as has been said in the apostle's ribs.
In this cauterization, there is no fear of the iron, for it does not cause as much harm as has happened in the location of the fistula where it was not treated and could not be cured.
Chapter 3.
Of the cauterization of the table.
When you cure the wound of the table, it is said that the cure is made in the division and not to confirm your cure, you should cauterize on it in three or four lines according to the length of the table according to the figure of the cauteries of the apostle, the figure of which has preceded.
When a point is made between any cautery and the largest part of a tooth or a few teeth, and the hand of the cauterist is the hand that has been mentioned in the cauterization of the patient's gum graft.
And you do not understand the matter, but I understand the cauterist; and the thigh should be elevated over the affected part.
And if another hand is needed to cauterize, it is because you do not know the cauterist, which has caused them to say in the capital of muscle dislocation, and they have removed the tendon that is in the end of the table that is used for the left thigh.
And if your elevation is according to the length of the body, so that points are made according to the latitude of the coast.
And then enter the two tendons, if possible, in that entrance where those pass through the tendon of the other part.
And then remove the cauterist; and it is four points made.
And if you see, make three points with the cauterist.
When you apply the cautery point that is located on the thigh, it is most comfortable when it is positioned after several minutes of massaging the area. This is preferable to the previous causes in the treatment.
Chapter 31.
On cauterization of gout.
Cauterization is not done on gout but on other parts properly.
When you treat gout with the tools of the trade, which have been divided and do not confuse your treatment, you find that four cauterizations are made in the circuit of the abdomen, one on the stomach, another on the small intestine, another on the mesentery, and two on the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization is proportionate to the spiciness of the cod.
And return the cauterization carefully after it has been massaged for a long time.
And do not remove the waste of treatment at once after the cauterization is made, because it is added to the wounds and it is quickly applied to help healing.
The form of the cauterization is such that it is cauterized on the belly, following the form of that which was previously shown, and that is the one in which the two are olive-shaped, following its form.
The text you provided is not in a recognizable language or format for translation.
Translation: "Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with stinging urine, cover them with cauteries on the back of the foot in cold water, as between the ear and the anus, and raise your hand above the cauteries and do not twist them; and also raise your hand, and do not return to that position, for the stinging urine will settle.
The cauteries are made in this way: Place two cauteries on the thighs, and on each thigh, make a point at the end of the cauterization cutter. And the cauteries should be made according to the length of the thigh: and on one side, remove the flesh and the other, leave it in its place; and on each thigh, place two cauteries.
And the ulcer should be treated for a long time, so that some urine may come out of it.
And treat those causes as they have said.
Capitulum XXXIII.
Chapter on the cauterization of the abdomen.
When pain arises from the belly due to humidity and cold, it is the digestive and retentive power that becomes weak, which is located in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with manieyras of curing and not conferring, and sometimes the thigh suffers cauterization of the digestive power exhibiting, they are cauterized with a large cauterization over the stomach according to what was done before in the cauterization of the stomach, on the circle and four cauterizations in the circuit of the subtle embellishment, on the clavilh subtle; and on the alcatin above alozis gran, or two cauterizations.
And if sometimes the humidity is excessive and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the pentenilh and over the intestines, and quite adjusting two cauterizations on the stomach and part of the thighs, four are sufficient for curing of which you do not err.
Chapter 34.
Of ancient embolisms' cauterization.
When old embalmed matter or a thick humorous exudation or corrupt moisture is found in the body, and is treated as if it were gout, it is called gout by physicians. Then, three points are made on the pus of the spine of both testicles and three points are made on the abdomen on either side of the navel for relief.
If the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face is frequently flushed, then make a large cauterization on the stomach; also make a cauterization on the navel, and another on the clavicle, and burn it for some time, and cure it within that time if it becomes healthy.
Capitulum .xxxv.
For the cauterization of the thigh, take the abscess of it.
When you cauterize the thigh, do you put on the cautery that is assembled as a ring. Place that ignited cautery in the abscess of the thigh, and then put the second point in the opening of the vein that leads to the sinus of the which is sane.
When one has gout, if it is severe, then burn (cauterize) each of the joints that have reconnected, and properly care for those as needed to heal the joints within the time it becomes healthy.
If you use a large cauterization on the skin, it will not heal well.
Capitulum xxxvi.
Of cauterization of gouty joints that are found in nature, they are divided into parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened for that reason, it can be healed by cauterization.
Therefore, when an accidental gouty joint is found, and it is old, the skin is corrupted and the humidity is corrupted, and therefore it is fitting that a doctor should be called to treat that, and properly know the quantity of the depth of the said joint in front.
One knows the cauterization that seems like a ray. And place that cauterization ignited in that joint, and according to the quantity in which it is inserted into the joint.
When you need to apply the cautery to those corrosive bodies that are burned on one side or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
And keep in mind the burn of the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestine, keep an eye on all those places; and do not open it until you are sure that it is not penetrating the flesh.
And cure the place after it has been made healthy.
If the place is sealed and all materials are removed, and there is no sign of inflammation for a long time, you will know that it has been completely cured.
If the materials are not of the same as the old ones, you will know that they penetrate or in the prey of them corrode, or open it for those causes that you will remember in their place.
Chapter XXXVII.
Of the application of cautery to the nails.
When in the nails there is pain from cold or from large ventilation, and if the thigh of the patient is inflamed, you should know that cautery is applied to that over the nails as it is applied to each nail as the rememoration of the clavicle that precedes.
When the second point is carefully cauterized, so that three lines of cauterization can be made, and more pain will be avoided in the future.
Chapter 38.
Of cauterization of the vagina.
When the vagina becomes thin and soft due to cold and moisture, and the bladder does not retain urine, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area at the tip of the vagina, over the vesical opening, using the teeth of a razor, and also at the side of the vagina.
And the length of each cauterization is according to the number of notches on the thorn; and it is cauterized at that point or at both points if necessary.
And the cauterization is made according to the process used.
Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the clitoris.
When cold and moisture reach the clitoris, and pregnancy is forbidden, and the menstrual cycles are corrupted, and conception is delayed, and pain is felt in the area of the clitoris, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauterizations around the umbilicus, as has been said in the cauterization of the vagina; and it is cauterized over the tip of the clitoris or at both points, and the cauterization is a thorn.
The first source sentence is "Capitol .xl." which trans
The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a line-
When cold humors infiltrate the joint of the ankle, and pain occurs due to the swelling of the surrounding tissue, and it is necessary to prolong the thigh over the other when compared to it. When the location of the dislocation is atrophied in that way, it should be treated with ice and compression.
Then cover the area with a cauterizing agent on the side of the ankle where the cauterization will be performed, because you have to avoid touching the circumference of the part that is rolling up, and so that the part falls into the circle's location.
And the cauterization of which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not at your disposal, you can cauterize that with three cauterizing agents made of olive oil.
And the cauterization should be made according to the amount of the intestine's spasm; and then care for that when it is healed.
Capital, Chapter 41.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the side of the ankle, and it is caused by the cold and dryness of the humor, the thigh should be treated as follows: that which has been said and not confirmed, and that is ancient, you cover the thigh with large amounts of humors gross or sweets made from pills or artificial pills or semblants; and then cauterize that.
When the cautery is used, there are two main types: one for medical purposes and one for fire.
There are two scientific cautery tools, one of which is used to cauterize the area over the ankle of the patient, following this triangular form; and it should be done with good depth. And the space between each cauterization is determined by the size of the object, whether it is a small or large cauterization.
Sometimes, the cautery is placed over the middle of the neck for four cauterizations.
If you wish, cauterize at the circle that is required for the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and it should be a continuous and burning circle that includes the entire spine.
This is the cautery tool used when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend beyond the thigh.
If it extends beyond the thigh, then cauterize that at two points on the thigh above the location where the wound is located; and a cauterization on the cavity for four days about the same part as before.
If the cautery is a scalpel, and the depth of the cautery depends on the amount of the spicule of the codon.
If the joint pain extends to the location where the feet are, and the doctor advises to cauterize there, then cauterize it with three points or four or more if directed by the doctor.
If the joint pain extends to the donor of the thigh, then cauterize it there with a scalpel cautery.
E keep in mind that during cauterization, do not use the cautery as a burning nerve or large artery, and if so, you may cause harm to the patient or contraction.
E and you have already seen one and another of those that were cauterized over the cavity and ended in the cauterization, and the fire was inflamed inside when the tumor achieved the foot, and the fire melted and corrupted the whole foot. And if an acid solution of the stomach is applied, and then death follows.
If the pain is in two parts and each is cauterized according to this method, it will relieve the pain.
When the cauterant is applied in the cauterization of ankle cauterization, this is the mantra: make it resemble a circle of iron where the circuit is the largest part of a palm; and it should be the size of a large bone or a small part of a thumb.
And cut that circle into another part; and the space between them is the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and those circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those lines is a nail or two nails, and make those margins of the iron decently displayed in the circles; and this is the form of it.
Then it should be lit in the fire when it is wrapped around and starts to sparkle, and it should be placed over the ankle, the thigh covered with a cloth. And then cauterize that part with three cauterizations in a line.
And you should dress that part with three plasters; and you should clean the border of the wound with water for several days; and you should cure that part when it is healed.
Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
When the points are made on the affected part, it causes pain and agony.
It is customary for doctors to use cauterization, which involves making two circles around the hole that has been perforated in the skin, where the tip of the needle or rod is located. The length of the wound should be about two inches or as needed.
If the space between them is not enough to accommodate the quantity of the growth; and they are removed further and laterally, and they should be placed side by side in this form:
Then place your hand over the opening of the anus, and cover it with your thumb; and prepare to catch the tail and fold it between two circles, and the quality of that should be as small as possible, and take about an hour for the pain to subside, and suffer the anus to micturate and defecate — when the micturation ceases — entro que cesse la micturacion.
And then raise your hand and take the instrument, and remove the tail of the water from the entire anus, leaving only the water inside.
When the patient has lain down for three hours and rests on that border where the black vesicle of the inflammation remains, then apply this remedy for three days, and let it run over the affected area; this is beneficial.
And cure that part as soon as it becomes healthy.
If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the patient lie down on their side and place an ice pack on the affected area.
This is the mania of cold water, and I have already written about this in the book on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and caustic that is not extinguished in one part, and then strip it and let it run over a new wave of the quality of which the part is left perforated by a small puncture, according to the amount that enters into it.
And let the end of the other wave pass over the same wave, and place the alkali and caustic water over the live water, pouring the water that comes from two vessels into it, and understand that these are for good compression, and apply the cold water to the hot water in the part that is left in the wave.
And then adjust the entire amount of that juice, and throw it on another part of the body, and add other alkaline substances, which are made from operations in medicine and cauterization of other parts of the body, which operation is done by fire.
And some of the medicines are made from those that are cauterized wide, such as honey and salt, which are mixed together to make a paste.
Guadalupe tells of an ancient operation and cure, in which the pain of ankle and sciatica was cured, and many people were made healthy by a vegetable called "holy basil," which was known to penetrate that part.
And if it is near certain herbs, and if not green, then a recent fig is taken; and if it is a little bit of gray, and is placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and is seen.
And it should be applied for three hours or according to the amount that the patient can tolerate.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
You should know that not all doctors use cauterization in these medicines unless they have the means to remove the heart.
When Escorrides said that when the intestine is tightened by a sheep's gut, it is cauterized at its own; and the cauterization should be done on the second hand as follows: it should be held with a string and soaked in old oil, and placed between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
And if you hold the dried and inflamed sheep's gut at that point where pain is felt, and place it on the string and loosen the entrance that is compressed. And keep doing this until the pain of the biting subsides within the ankle and returns to its previous state.
And this cauterization is called the cauterization of sheep.
Chapter 42.
Of cauterization for pain in two places.
Sometimes pain is in one leg due to several causes such as gout, thorn, or excessive evacuation, and for other causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet and humid matter.
If cauterization is not done in this specific case, which is caused by the effusion of watery humors, it should not be performed.
Indeed, the evacuation of the foot should be done with pills fitted to its shape and appearance, which are points over the two in the line where the pain is located, according to the latitude of the foot, because it may need a cauterization or less, according to the tolerance of the foot and the virtue of the patient.
And if there is a point for cauterization, then use cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four points, or with one point on the median clavicle according to this form:
Capitol, Chapter 33.
Regarding cauterization at the beginning of gilt-freezing.
Watches are seen on the feet of these children; and since the beginning of the foot in the children, it is that they affect their structure in the ankle and elevation and movement.
And wasting occurs on the lower back of the two and the nails of the foot that begin to overtop the other vertebrae.
When you see that and wish to stop it, then make points on this cautery that is circular according to this form: that takes the cautery over the entire part of the spine engagement.
And if you want, make points on the circuit of the spine with the cautery of two or three points. And the points should be in between them.
And then cure the place that is healthy as it has been said.
May you keep in mind that the cautery should not be administered in yellowish tissue that is a result of nerve spasms.
Chapter 45.
Of cautery for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, how is gout treated by cold humors with the hand of cure and not to increase the pain, then make points with the cautery.
This is the translation of the first line: "And it is that you cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with the cauterization tool.
This line seems to be asking if the cauterization tool used is olive oil. The translation would be: "And is this the form of the cauterization tool?" or "And is this the
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." This line is advising the user to use a sharp instrument to make incisions or marks on the skin of the foot for medical purposes. If the pain spreads to the neighboring joints or other joints, and it worsens, then you should cauterize that over each joint with three or four turns of this cauterization tool made of olive oil." This line is advising the user to apply multiple turns of the cauterization tool to different joints in order to alleviate pain and improve the condition.
If the necessary cauterizations are found to be similar, then you should cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand, only slightly around the specific area." This line is advising the user to apply gentle pressure when cauterizing and not to force the tool too hard in order to avoid causing further harm.
If the pain worsens in the knee and elbow, then you should apply the cauterization tool that was previously mentioned." This line is advising the user to use the same cauterization tool that was previously recommended for the affected joint.
If the pain is only in the most recent times, and it is called sugar, then you should make points on the circuit of the forefingers as they rotate, making points on those two lines.
If the pain remains in the following parts, then make points on the circuit of the belly buttons on each navel and on the clitoris of the female.
If the pain persists in these joints of the thighs or muscles, then cauterize the points of all parts of the assistants.
And do not remove the patient's good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is well regulated and in good condition, this cauterization will be beneficial, God helps.
Chapter XLV.
Of cauterization of wounds.
When the wound is in the ankles and the intestines are coming out of the hernia, and then do as follows: you must command the patient to eat less on that day and use gentle causes for it because the bowel will be pulled from the abdomen.
And follow the patient's advice on the other side of the abdomen and command him to hold the abdomen when it is flat or appears that the hernia or the intestine is coming out.
And then return that to the abdomen and press on the bones of the pelvic girdle, and call for help if the pain seems to resemble the pain of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
When there is a cold humor that has entered the body, causing joint pain, especially in the feet, it is customarily referred to as gout by medical prof Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And if you pause the cautery on that part of the skin, and then enter with your hand to touch the pentenilh within the meatus of the urethra; and repeat this approach if you have not succeeded in the first attempt within the urethra.
And carefully observe the state of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, as you do not burn that intestine because it has not come out over the thigh or for some other great misfortune.
And you know that when you touch the cautery, do not ignore the bones, and your operation will not be successful.
When the cauterization of children is done with subtlety according to their greatness and measure.
And care for the site of the cauterization for three days, so that the wound of the fire may become less inflamed.
And take care of it with those who are close to you, so that it becomes healthy again.
When the wound is covered over on the right side for ten days, after sealing the site and the plague.
And pay attention to the nutrition of him according to the length of time for the cure of him, and that the intestine does not come out of the belly, and that the hernia does not come out due to the efforts of healing.
And when you want to take away for ten days, administer gentle ointments and hold it for others for ten days.
And this diet and fasting and drinking, and vigorous exercise, when you use this entire regimen of medicine, will make you healthy.
And you direct the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the belly, and as at the beginning, and you want that they do not come out, cauterize the rupture of that which is done according to the quantity of it, and be careful that it is exhumed from the abdomen like the last part of it; and take care of that which has been said, and do not adjust.
When the first cut has been made, it is recommended to cauterize it with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it helps to stop the bleeding.
And another line is placed along the latitude in the latitude, and a third line at the bottom; and then remove your hand from it, but use a clavichord cauterization instead of the first one, which was placed further away and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization of torsion.
When pain occurs in any of the limbs due to strain or percussion and persists for a long time without relieving the symptoms of the doctor, it is necessary to cauterize with a point cautery.
And the cauterization of each part according to its magnitude and smallness, as well as its veins and development, and the location of the twist and pain in the member.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; and if not, you should repeat the cauterization over it. Four out of five punctures are those that are close to the member from which you want to remove them, because you can reach them with the point cautery when that member is healed.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language that
De cauterizacio de lepra" translates to "Of cauterization in leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia" translates to "The wounds of some leprosy patients are cauterized with great success, and the specialty of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flax and melancholy.
When you want to cauterize that part, consider if leprosy is present and if it has been cured as said in the division and not done, nor this, and fears about the thigh that corruption comprehends the entire body of him and the whole complexion of him, then cauterize that over the head with a pointed cautery: one on the top of the head, and one further down from there, and turn the face to the end of the hair; and hold it firmly, over the nape or servant.
And finally, if the cauterization is made a little within the bone before it enters the joints, and the strings are displaced, because the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; then cauterize on the next part as requested.
And if leprosy has already expanded over the thigh and manifestly appears, then you should know that the cauterization is done on those as said in the head: and cauterize on the extremity of the nose, and on two of the upper eyelids, and on two of the collarbones, and on two of the shoulders, and on the two shoulder blades, and on the great spine near the neck, and on the neck, and on each ankle, and on one of each ankle, and on each wrist, and on one of each wrist, and on each knuckle, and on one of each knuckle, and on each muscle, and on both sides of the thigh; and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each toe of the feet, and on the flesh of the thighs.
When guarding the nerves that are over the thigh that does not burn, it is necessary to do so.
And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery over the bones of the pelvis and over the mouth of the stomach, and over the anus.
And you know that the fewer times you cauterize, the less effective and less beneficial it is; and you know that the thigh does not have pain in the cauterization, just as they have them, so that the body of the patient has already become stupefied.
And know that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, following which species of tools precede them.
And properly care for the cauterization with flour of errors, honey, and the other cure, when it is healthy.
Capital 48.
Of cauterization for stupefaction.
When a member is stupefied or falls asleep and is treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, and does not become healthy, then you should cauterize that stupefied member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
When the cold humors infiltrate the joints of the body, a few points are made on the surface of the foot using a pointed cautery. And if the affected part becomes healthy, then it is cured.
Sometimes, the affected part is cauterized with a stupefying substance that helps to relieve pain in the limbs and spine, and stimulates the nerves that supply that member, making the stupefying substance more effective.
This should not be done unless one has knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and the movement of the nerves throughout the body.
Chapter 49.
Of cauterization of ulcers that are gangrenous.
When the ulcer is old and does not respond to the treatment of the affected part of medicine, then you should cauterize over that point using a pointed cautery after a certain amount of time has passed, according to the quantity of the joint's flesh that becomes white and changes color, and the color of the ulcer also changes.
And if the affected part is treated with flour and lentils of rose oil and arngos leaves, and saffron or yellow saffron, each part is a portion and all are mixed, and then it is wrapped in a cloth and placed over the area until it becomes healthy.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language
De cauterizacio de cranc" translates to "Of cauterization of gout
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut" translates to "When cancer begins and you want that part of the body, then cauterize that point with a pointed cautery in the circle of the skin where it is rolled.
And the wise ones say that the point that is cauterized on the skin is in the middle of the cauterization; I have not seen this before, for fear that it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen some wounds.
And it is said that the point that is cauterized in the circumference of the skin is like the one we have described, or like the one that is made to be cauterized.
Capitol.
Of cauterization of adulteration.
When an adulteration is slow in maturation, and that is due to superfluity or the state of the thighs, which is old and thin, or for time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of adulteration; then cauterize on the circumference of that point that is smaller than the one that is made to be cauterized, and apply it so that it does not become too hard in maturation.
If you want to make the point of the cauterization, then you should know the cauterization that this is the form of: and stop it at the point of the adulteration when it penetrates the codena.
If the cautery is applied in that location where it was previously placed, for the reason that the arm of the bracelet is loosened; and accordingly, care should be taken to enter that area which is becoming healthy.
Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of gout.
Gout is a wandering corruption in the member, which consumes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you sometimes see that gout in the location where it was previously cauterized with fire, then you should use fewer cauterization clavuses, and larger ones as appropriate in the location where the gout is.
And cauterize that from all sides entering until the entire corruption is eradicated and no cause remains of it.
And apply that for three days, and then place your hand over the cauterized locations once a day until all the wounds are completely eradicated and the entire corruption is gone.
And take care of that with an ointment made from burnt herbs.
If after three days the skin begins to heal in that location where there is no corruption, then so be it; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization over the parts that are still corrupting.
When some doctors treat certain patients with sharp knives in place of cauterization. However, cauterization is more effective for healing.
And I have already said the cure of the acute medicine division, and then take that when it has occurred.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization of claws and other similar things.
Scars are seen in the parts where the large, rough claw of the patient's foot has bitten, and it causes pain; then cauterization is performed on two sides, either with hot iron or with a cold snout.
However, cauterization with hot iron is similar to a burn, which is made by the amount of iron that contains the claw of each part, and it is done with fine cuts.
And stop the heat on the claw, and then turn your hand over to the cauterization in the circuit of the claw while it comes to the depth of the claw. The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a line-by-line translation of the And if it is necessary to apply a plaster to the wound, then apply the plaster over it for a day, so that the wound will be cured of its wounds.
And properly care for the area that is inflamed due to the presence of dead tissue.
If it does not convert, and visible signs of inflammation appear on the surface of the body, primarily in the chest and feet, you must administer first aid using hot cauteries, and take a piece of iron or copper wire, and place it over the hole; and then apply a little cold water to the wound, and hold your hand over it, and turn the compress of your hand around the claw, and press the end of the wire against the end of the claw, and pull the wire out of the claw's end through the hole of the claw; and wait for a while until the end of the wire is bitten by the inflamed tissue for an hour, and then remove it, and make sure the claw is in its original position.
And if you do not find it, and the other part is also affected, then cover all those that are in the body with it.
And properly care for those pus that the wounds of the claws have been eliminated as much as possible from the inflamed tissue.
The first line of the text is "Capitol .liiii." which
De cauterizacio de tremor" translates to "Of cauterization for tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatro cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar." translates to "When tremors are caused by cold humors in the nerves or due to fever of the cause being cold, or for some other reason, it is necessary to cauterize that part with four cauterizations or one over the spine of each vertebra, between each vertebra and a cauterization; and to cauterize on the chest and stomach of the patient, and on the olive.
When the shaking of the patient ceases and the health of the affected member improves, it is considered a cure.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but "Capitol .lv
A burn from an acupuncture procedure can occur on the chest.
When in the chest, and the pustules are formed by materials that are grossly corrupted, then as it begins to appear, that it should be cauterized over all of the opening of the canula, which is subtle at the end, the extremity of which is extended to fire; or from long estrus; or from slow cauterization.
And sometimes the veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not surprising, and the excess is broken into those, and they become healthy.
However, it is believed that this is a proper evacuation by flebutomy.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but "Capitol lvi
A burn from a cut that occurs in the liver due to an incision of the artery.
Troops that are seen flowing from the arrowhead that is pierced by the plague, or from the incision of the apostemas or cauterization of the member, and then seeming, and it is difficult to remain there.
When you have to deal with gout, you should cut off the part of the thigh that is closest to the anus, and place something over that part to prevent it from being touched again until the flow of the sac has stopped and no more comes out.
And then place a few greenish-olive cautery sticks in the fire and light them, and blow on those until they are hot enough.
And take a small or large part of that location and place it over the vein firmly, so that the previously mentioned artery is not affected and remains in its place, and then cauterize it so that it is cut off and stays in its place.
And if the sac is expelled from the anus of the artery while you are still cutting the part and removing the cauterization, then take another sharp cauterization stick from the ones that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this until the sac is secured.
And remember not to burn the nerves that are here, and it will come back over the thigh another time with malice.
1. You should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it in those restraints, and especially when the artery is large, not even with one of four methods: with cauterization as mentioned earlier, or extraction if it is not extracted, four when it is extracted, the extremities of the veins are burned and the current is restricted, or that it is narrowed by a ligature or a constricting device, or that they are placed over the medicines of those which restrict the current; and they are strong like a pulley or a constraint.
When one administers a proper diet to the body and restricts certain foods that cause inflammation or constipation, such as spicy or fried foods, it is unlikely that they will feel comfortable without any relief.
When there is no doctor or medicine available, one should manually close the wound of that vein as they have been told, and understand the great pressure inside that part of the plague that has been separated from the intestine, and over the artery, it is not damaged; and over the artery, it is squeezed with wet feces when that part is crowded and engorged; and less should be done if it requires cauterization or medical treatment.
Of incision and puncture, and ventouse, and of plague and its kinds.
In the first book of all the diseases that cauterization is convenient and effective, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments used in those cases, and I have ordered the chapters of the subcutaneous fat around the head.
And your procedure in this chapter for that purpose, so that the seeker of this knowledge may be satisfied with it, and you do what is asked of you.
When you begin this work, son, I advise you to be careful, as in this first capital of cauterization, there is great fear.
For this reason, it is necessary to take great care, as in the operation that is being performed here, several catgut strips are used, which help evacuate the blood that should be present in the vein or make an incision over the aposteme or excise for excretion or purification of the plague or extraction of stones or incision of peyra and their appearance. When all of these symptoms are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst case, death, then it is time to seek medical attention.
You advise me that I should not fall into the disease of gout in this situation, as some women's hands have been known to be affected by such ailments. When you go to the patient's bedside and see that they are in great pain and suffering from their illness, and because of the severity of the illness and its long duration, and the illness is causing the patient to suffer, then the illness is the cause of their death.
And from those you know what to expect and say, hoping for that cure, and the patient's illness is pernicious.
And you do not suppose that you agree with the one who sees you of the quality of this manly; and your caution is greater than expected and your greed; and you do not presume any cause over it except certain knowledge that you must inform us of, and which will be passed on in a commendable way.
And use in the care of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication of the one who is converted to health, wherein you assist them over acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, children, God is in you the divine understanding and does not leave you without direction and protection, because this is in its own hands.
When you order this chapter to be distinguished from the following chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterizations, concerning the care of the foot within the feet, so that you may know what you asked for and for which there is a need.
1st Chapter.
The treatment of urine, which is contained in the head of children.
You know that this malady is seen in the children and that you must give them their childhood and when the nurse stretches the child's head, its life is at stake.
And some are seen because of a lack of care that is not cleaned.
I have not seen this malady except in children; and all those that I see are in danger of death, and for this reason I have seen some good work done in them.
And you have seen that a child's head was full of urine, and its head was very magnificent until it could no longer be over the greatness of the child's head, and less when the moisture became better until it could no longer be over the fire of death.
When this moisture or is added between the vertebra and the bone, or is added further down on the bones.
In the first line of the source sentence, it seems that the text is discussing an operation where humidity is present between the vertebrae and the bone, and the post is placed in the middle of the head. The author suggests covering the area with a cloth to prevent water from entering. The second line mentions a fissure in the latitud, which is likely referring to a crack or split in the bone. The length of the fissure is said to be twice the size of the humidity that enters it. The third line describes this as the shape of the spatum.
If humidity increases and the aposteme becomes greater, you will find two fissures in this manner according to this method:
If the humidity is below the skull, then you see the commissures of the bare scalp become wet and sweaty when you touch that area with your hand, which is a sign that the poultice made with the tievyah plant is not suitable for the entire body. Cover the three fissures in the back of the head with this hand.
And apply the extracted ointment throughout the humidity; and firmly close the fissures with draps and plumassols; and cover it over the eye and let the oil penetrate into the skin for five days, and gently caress the throat and engage the tongue, and firmly close the cap equal to the other member that is comfortable and healthy.
And another incision of the same size as the wound and collection of sweat, for some veins are less in the occipital region, or in the part below, or on the right or left; and then pay attention to the incision where the wound and collection of sweat appear, and follow what is most possible for you.
You should observe that the artery does not infringe and diverts blood vessels from the leg to the body for that flow of blood to be eliminated by evacuation of moisture.
3. "Capitol segon" is not a standard medical
4. "Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs or al pietz" means "When you end the catharsis or rhumatism on the knees or the chest". "E es antiquitat aquo" means "And it is antiquated in this", "e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas" means "and does not confirm in this the cure of the physicians", "lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias" means "you should apply the same cure in this incision of those
5. "E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap" means "And cover when you want to incise those that the thigh wants to cap", "aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias" means "appropriately roughen the location as deep as the arteries appear", "e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap" means "and strengthen the neck of the thigh with the doctor's hand", "e aprop considera on polsa la vena" means "and consider where to cut the vein", "e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz" means "and the locations of each over the locations that the ears are depressed", "e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes" means "and they should be hidden only in men".
And place your hand over the artery at the point where it is, and place an incision in each of the parts that are in pain, and let it be through the bone of each part, and it will be for the latitude of the head.
And if you want, enter the spatula into the artery and turn it to the parts that are in pain.
And if the length of the incision is twice as much as the depth that any vein is cut, when a vein is cut and it is seen coming out with pulsation, the which collapses suddenly for the collapse of the frequency.
If the artery does not appear in the pulse, it is necessary that you measure the length of the abdomen and place your hand on the point where it is, and enter through the bone.
And that which is necessary to cut the vein in the amount of one-tenth, and less than half of the amount that can be, and then it is according to the amount that appears on the strength of the thigh and the repletion of the artery of the vein.
And if you consider the phlegm, and then if you remain on the bone any cause of pain, it is necessary that you incise accordingly so that it does not cause strangulation of the cautery.
When you press on the swollen part with your thumb, and care for it as if it were inside, it will become healthier.
Capitulum III.
When removing the arteries that are in the templates.
When an old wound or catarrh occurs in the humors that are in the templates, and it is similar to the old ones, and it is treated with the hands of curacious medicine, but it does not relieve, we have come to this problem of extractions of arteries in the templates or cauterization of those parts as they have shown.
And the hand of the operation and extraction of those is what the template race does to the ones that are in the templates; and understand the artery that appears in the template as it is shown by the two hands, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the vehemence of feces.
And if it is hidden from you, the part of the template is strengthened by some fabric; and place the feces in the location where there is a dry or wet cloth or the tailor's shop that appears to you as the artery clearly. And take the salve of which this is the form: And when you reach the waist, you will find that it is easier to enter through the arch; and you will get out of it and take out that which was inside the coden and discover that which was in the tunics, which were left outside of it, from all parts.
If the artery is thin, you will wrap that around the end of the onyx and insert one part after another according to the number of those that are elongated at the ends of it and are contracted, and if it does not leak fluid, then it will not be able to lift the fluid from all.
And you will empty the fluid of three units.
If the artery is large, you will cover that with two layers of cloth or ropes, and do not let it get to the putrefaction due to the consolidation of the pus and prevent the leakage of fluid.
And you will remove the excess that is between two layers; and do it at that time or at another time.
If you want, cauterize that with a cautery within the bone that is cauterized with a sharp instrument within which the ends of it are incised and will remain in place of that work.
It is better work if the fever or the affliction is not in the groin; rather, cauterization is used for those causes that help to dry the moist areas, and therefore it is better in its youth.
When cutting the arteries that obstruct the ancient part of the thigh, and placing them on the smooth parts of the leg, and applying pressure with your hand to make the flesh more supple, and allowing the doctor to perform surgery more easily, it is necessary.
While you are working on another part of the artery, if you touch the sac of the artery, either tighten it with your hand or with a cautery, or compress the area around the thigh, and hold it firmly to prevent the sac from expanding. If the cause of that is not present, stop pressing on the part where the sac is compressed, and wrap the area with a wet cloth to prevent freezing, and hold it firmly until the acuity returns, and be careful to hold it steady.
That is why when cutting the vein, it is necessary to cauterize with a cautery that has two points, because you have seen the two locations where the pain is, and stopped pressing, not gently, but firmly, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two parts, so that it is elongated from the extremities of the leg, which are not consolidated by this cauterization.
This is the method of cauterization:
When the sharpness of the two heels is an example. When however there is only sharp pain that two cots are better, then if the pain is sharp and comes quickly after each step, and does not pass through the flesh quickly.
When there is any swelling in those places, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is gradually peeled off.
This work is better in its entirety and puts it aside.
When the space between two thighs is of a certain size, it is considered appropriate.
When the space between two thighs is of a certain size,
of the cure of the chest for acute and acidic husks.
When the husks are acidic and the chest is affected by those veins that are over the root of the head, and do not respond to any cause of medicinal cure, and sometimes the face of the thigh becomes elongated and seems like it is walking on the front legs of ants, and the husks become dry, as if the points of their nails were sharp, the ancient herbs in this operation are scarce, and the cure for this operation is far from being close.
And it is that you command the thigh to bend the nails that are on the front, and insert three incisions into the front, separated by the distance of the front. And if the length of the fissure is two-thirds, then the first fissure should be distant from the nasal location of the front by two thirds of the movement of the fingers that are on the lacrimal, and the third part.
When guarding the incision of the arteries that are in two parts, and extend your hand for the continuation of biting the jaws. If the space of any incision is three times its width.
If you have a sponge-like layer or sheets that absorb moisture for those that dry the wound.
Then place the sponge between the two sharp ends, which is the form of the incision. What of the part where the templates enter the second incision. Apply to the entire chain that is between two incisions and the bone that is over the bone, and then the wound will move into the second incision. And then strain the sponge and enter it into another incision with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And hold the sharp side of the scalpel by the flesh annexed to the chain, and the other end of the leon's tooth on the bone, and press that which comes through the fissure, and cut off all those that descend from the head to the toes.
When the incision is continued on this side, and it appears to come out of the narrow opening into the other opening.
And suppose that the amount of blood is increased, then remove the locations of the cedent's toes.
And pause in every narrow opening of the thigh bone, and pause on those parts that are full of hair, oil, and sweat, and see that it does not cause gangrene.
And on the third day, remove the catheter and administer a large infusion of water or saline, and apply this to the affected area, which is reddish-orange in color and other areas where the plagues are cured.
Capital.
Of the treatment of gangrene by catheter and the descendants of the parts of the fingers.
When the catheter is removed from the vein and continued, and sometimes the fingers are reduced in size, and their appearance becomes blurred, and the ulcers on the eyelids and the edges of the nails are inflamed and excoriated, and in the pre-onset of the head there is acute pain and subsequent extenuation, you should know that these accidents are due to the materials and catheters not entering through the veins of the fingers.
The best cure for this is to command the patient to sit down and place a finger in the hole of the forehead, making a small incision in the middle of the forehead, starting from the left temple to the right temple; then enter the bone within the knuckles of the fingers, which are the ones that need to be shaved; when the bone is exposed,
When the entire surface of the wound is dry and clean, and if it is possible to replace the flaps or edges between the fissure of the groin or the flaps themselves, do so. Then, mix finely with powdered herbs in wine and apply it to the affected area to prevent the formation of pustules.
When you see that the pustule has diminished, take care to cover the wound with powdered herbs as soon as it begins to enter the flesh of the nail, and apply a remedy that dries the skin, as if you were making dough from flour and collinseed oil in equal parts, and mixing them, and applying the plaster to these diseases of the native skin.
Chapter 6.
Of the remedy for the swelling that occurs in the ears.
The cause of swelling in the ears is one of four species, which can be either a mineral stone or something that resembles a stone, like iron and steel, or it can be from a plant, like chamomile or fennel, or it can be caused by fluid, like water and vinegar, or it can be the semblance of some animal.
When joint pain is present in the knee or another cause resembles those causes that do not adjust or believe in the knee, and stops the knee to the sun, and if the pain appears, distillation is made in a certain cause of olive oil or sesame, and applies the extraction of the same, and makes it condise, and presses the nails for the event of the withdrawal. And some pause in the circuit of the ring around certain thighs of cloth or wool, and extend the ring to the parts thereof, as many turns as can be remembered for these causes.
And if it is not gotten, then administer an extraction from the part with the instrument called the epi-cicerary, which is of this form:
And if it is forgotten, then so be it; and otherwise, you administer the extraction of this part with a subtle and few duplication.
And if it is not forgotten for this, then you make a cannula of ram and enter the extremity of the cannula into the opening of the aureola and close it at the end of the cannula with wax and olive oil so that it is not cut until the cannula. And if you extract from the upper part of the thigh, then too many turns are required as much as can be remembered for this cause.
If not forgotten in this manner, then you press with your thumb or with the back of your hand on the part where the nails are pressing on the skin a certain quantity, and place that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelops it gently around the cotton. When entering that part of the ear that is easiest to reach, and removing any moisture from it.
And if you do not forget all the causes that have been mentioned, then make points on that part where the tendon or muscle is most tender.
And the hand of that part is what you must first cauterize at the beginning, to cut off the vein of the sephalic sinus and then extract the second part of the intestine, and then make a small fissure in the lower part of the ear, and place the thread in the location where it is most comfortable. And if the fissure of the lunar figure goes into the foot, and the foot is atrophied, remove that which can be done with appropriate instruments; and cut the fissure at the speed that is appropriate, and treat that part inside the foot that is becoming healthy.
E if the cause of the pain in the ear is one of the greasy ones that have been cooked and inflamed, then administer the treatment and remove it; but if you do not follow your advice and instructions, then you must take subtle substance according to this form: When treating an abscess on that part of the body that is located in the groin, apply warm compresses and keep the area clean.
Do not apply cold compresses when you think that the area has already been hydrated by the steam from the groin, and stop moving the area as much as possible, and carefully extract any remaining tissue or subcutaneous fat, or if necessary, use a scalpel to make an incision.
In the anus that is inserted into the groin, use the medication as directed by the doctor and complete the anus with a cloth old enough to fit, and place a warm compress on the anus where the abscess is located, and if for any reason it is forgotten, do not worry; otherwise, take several large cotton balls and heat them in the oven, and then place one of them in the patient's anus and press it against another cotton ball that is covering the area to relieve the pain. Do not stop applying the compress as soon as all of the abscess is visible.
Do not stop applying the compress as soon as all of the abscess is visible. When the wound is cleaned with paper or gauze, and you place one end of the thread in the hole and stretch the other end as much as possible until it is tightly closed, then it is ready for use.
And if you make and cut as many slits as possible within the wound, and then stretch the cannula over the entire wound so that it is outside of the extra-urinary bladder, then it is ready for use.
In the extraction of a foreign body that has entered the wound, if it is small, it can be removed with great care and skill, as described in the division; but if it is large, the cause of its appearance at the time of extraction should be investigated, and the cause of the wound should be made known to all other causes that may have caused the wound.
In the removal of worms that have been generated in the wound, when you treat that worm as described in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not confirm your cure, then you should closely monitor the wound under sunlight.
If here any cause of the gallstones appears, then take out that part with the hand or with one of those subtle tools, but if no such cause is found, then take a rigid catheter and pull it out from there, and this is the form of the gallbladder: Enter the subtle end in the anus according to the amount that suffers from the gallbladder; and then push it with force, and make sure you see the edges clearly, entering if all the gallstones are small.
If you do not obey my instructions, then you will leave and close the circuit of the catheter as they have said; you will administer distillations which have already been sprouted in the treatment of gallstones, and find it in the distillation tract.
And is your discharge from that which you have emptied in the anus with this instrument of which this is the form of the gallbladder? And make that of silver or of iron, rigid, in which there is a small hole, and it will be easier to push through.
When it comes to being in the cavity of the uterus, as necessary here, one should do so. If you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the uterus, and place it in the concavity of the anus, or of any herb, or of that which you want of these medicines in the canula — and that is in the anus —, and insert the ray into the uterus and expel it from there at the same time as the oil is expelled in the concavity of the anus and the patient feels the oil's heat.
And if it is wrapped around the anus, it has already been burned by a little fire. And keep in mind that the cause you will distill in the anus is not too cheap, as the medicines of the anus do not suffer from this.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure for anal warts.
Some warts are found in the bellies of women who have not been pierced, and these have already caused problems in men, warts on the meat of the anus due to pain or nothing in that; and this wart is found in the prepuce of the anus that does not consent to the cutting, and some are found in the parts that are deformed.
When something happens in the pre-on (pregnancy) of the patient, which they do not understand, it is in the more difficult cases of difficult care.
When you have achieved the desired effect, make sure that you place the anus of the patient towards the sun and look in that direction. And if you see apparent swelling, open that small spatula of which this is the form of it:
If the end of it where there is small latitude, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two leons (or points) so that it does not cause pain to the anus.
And if the swelling is due to fleshy growth in the anus or in the meat of the patient, use those small spatulas and press with great force until it is completely removed.
And if the swelling is in the prepuce of the anus, use a small spatula of a leon and heat it slightly, and then insert it into the anus.
And if you feel swelling in the anus that the patient's thigh becomes easy to open due to gravity, try to increase the pressure of the spatula on the anus; and remember not to harm the nerves of the anus.
When you have paused in the second layer of the cloth of the second part of the Egyptian ointment; and do so for a few days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or if you take any powder and thrust it into the water and sprinkle it over the plague according to the way you use it and use it on it; and if you find that the cloth has already been soaked, then you should know that you have mistakenly taken the powder and replaced it with another powder of the same kind that you will wrap in a cloth that is red or pink, if it is the plague that is red or pink; and take care of that within a few days until it becomes healthy.
If you have an abscess, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the thigh, and use another cure from another source that restricts the flow of the abscess, which is said in the chapter of distillation.
Capitulum VIII.
Of the cure of asthenia that ends up in the eyes.
When the cold humors that infiltrate the body's joints are caused by a specific type of cold, some of them become dry.
Then, if you have those sharp points or spikes, and cut them into smaller pieces, and place them over the areas that need it.
If there is pain in the flow of venomous blood, then you should use a subtle cautery on those points.
The best cauterization is when the points are made with sharp and dry instruments, and when they return to their original shape when returned to their original position; and when those points are burned, they become charred and do not return.
Chapter 9.
A remedy for great pain that comes to the eyes of the feet.
Dry spots appear on the eyelids of the feet due to an unknown cause that is related to their strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called "great pain.
And there is an addition of moisture in the eyelids of the feet.
This operation in their eye is that which you should consider as inflammation if it arises from the eyelid and is exacerbated throughout; and its cause is unknown.
Then cover that wound with a dressing, and fasten it so that it is easily entered into when discharged, and suspend it so that it does not drop off.
And if the size is large, you adjust the suture to it; and care for that after it has healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer from that for the next part of the gout, as you restore and encase it.
And if the inflammation is declining towards the corners of the eyelid, you should superficially cut the corner of the eyelid, and then suspend the inflammation with a stitch, another that you instruct for the incision, and press it to the whole part, and if the eyelid is elongated due to the incision, it is not known in this case for any cause.
When approaching the incision, wash the sharp edge with salty water; and care for the area around it that is prone to becoming infected.
Capital of the tenth.
The cure for the eye's inner eyelid.
The disease that arises from the layers of the inner eyelid, and more especially in children, worsens the wrinkles around them and causes their eyes to become red; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of this, as wrinkles appear on their eyes.
And have you ever noticed those wrinkles on their faces all the time, and especially when they sleep; and on their inner eyelids, which already have inflammation and an upcoming infection, and apparent redness in the eyes; and if you press the area with your thumbs, you will feel the infection entering those.
And an operation that is often performed on the outer ear is when the ear lobe pauses the pinna at the top of the ear, and also pauses the tragus and makes it swell, and makes the circle according to the quantity of cartilage that contains the total part, and also pauses the pinna over that and presses with your thumbs on the entire perimeter because there is additional inflammation in the meatus of the ear, and the meatus is not greater than the meatus made in incision.
When you are about to cut the umbilical cord that has come out of the womb, four things should be done: one is to clean it with a cloth, another is to tie it with a thread, and the third is to cut it with a knife. The fourth thing is to inspect it for any defects or abnormalities.
Then extract those parts that you have entered between the thighs, which are deformed and bent between the left and right sides of the body, when they are swollen.
And be careful not to adjust in the fissure because the stomach may not come out of the hole and cause damage.
If you do not see your arm at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust your arm in the fissure with ease as you process the arm; and extract those parts that have been said; and submerge the hand in water and observe the swelling and pause over the location and stretch out those am polvils.
And then they pull out the salt and pause that part in the cavity of the fissure because that is what remains of that moisture.
And then apply this care that is necessary for healing.
If you happen to be in the location of the acupuncture point, apply the plaster to that area where it is painful.
1. I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided
2. seems to be incomplete or in a language other than English, Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you
3. I apologize, but the text you provided is still incomplete or in a language that I cannot recognize. Could you please provide the complete text or clarify which language it is written in? I am designed to assist with English, Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
4. I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is still incomplete or in a language that I cannot recognize. Could you please provide the complete text or clarify which language it is written in? I am designed to assist with English, Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
And thus, in the corner of the eyelid, where the lashes are adjusted, and the upper part of the eyelid is incised; and then extract the fistula and press down on the lower part of the eyelid with a small piece of cloth or bandage, and place it over the eyelid that is being cut, and it should look like a small piece of charcloth.
However, it is important to note that the figure changes according to the amount of eyelid elevation, four in all, and out of those, the ones that indicate that a significant part of the eyelid should be incised according to the amount by which the eyelid is flattened.
And thus, on the sputum over the two lines that you have pressed down, and begin from the upper part of the lacrimal major to the lower part of the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, it should look like the largest of the king's.
And place the nail in one of the two angles of the girdle, and scrape it off entirely, and adjust it to the curve of the two lips of the gullet or the lynn of fine wool, and remove the sand, and make it adhere if there are any excessive parts of the nails on two sides for some reasons, if you want to do that, and if not, do not worry.
When it comes to sewing the sutures of the wounds into the body within three or four days, and then caring for that.
If you want, remove the sutures and care for that as soon as possible, to dry and constrict the eyelid, and when the eyelid is swollen, use the plague's seal and its addition; better no sutura and so do it again.
However, in this case, there is concern about the thigh, and it is good operation, and not in fear.
And there is another maniery to suture, and it is that you see about the eyelid as if it were a piece of meat, and then elevate the eyelid by three incisions in this way:
However, if it is not possible to do this, then have the incisions, and do not cut it, then take a ring in which there is thread and put it on the side of the figure, and enter the other finger next to the larger lacrimal, and the other finger next to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the two eyes so that the fingers are equal, and raise the part where you elevate the eye, raise the entire chain over the one that has been sewn as recommended.
When adjusting the corners of the plague's wound with a stitch, and treating that part which is healthy.
When an abscess or wound occurs on your skin, if it is painful and swollen, and if it becomes infected, you should clean the area with soap and water, and cover it with a sterile bandage.
If any ulcers appear on the eyelid that the eyes have converted to, then use the same treatment as for an abscess; less suturing is needed in such areas.
Cleansing the wound is done in this way: If you convert the eyelid and cut along the line that I have indicated; and then, using a small needle or a thin thread, make holes at the same distance from the edge of the eyelid as the distance from the eyelid to the corner of the mouth. And if you have already sewn up the ends of each part, then use the thread.
Add a little subtleity to the end of each thread, and tighten the knots of each part as much as possible, and then lay it aside for later use, so that the knot does not come undone and does not break when the patient is moved.
If time is wasted, you should cut the intestine as soon as possible, and properly care for the wound that has been infected.
When the eye is closed, the eyelid is raised and the eyebrows do not touch.
And this is how you should apply these remedies: This sentence seems to be discussing the measurement of longitude and latitude. A possible translation could be: "It has the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise
The text you provided is not in the language of the medieval medical treat
This sentence seems to be discussing the elevation of joint pain in the foot. A possible translation could be: "When the foot hurts, the joint pain is aggravated." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
This sentence seems to be discussing the operation of joint pain in non-natural feet. A possible translation could be: "When the feet are hard, rough, and painful, the operation is performed by taking a fine needle and placing it on a subtle cedar with a leon, and then adjusting the ends of the needle and notches as needed." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation. This sentence seems to be discussing the length of the areas for quantity. A possible translation could be: "And it is the length of the areas for quantity of a palm." However, without more context
This sentence seems to be discussing the composition of another subtle area on top of the previous one, and cleaning the ends of that if you want. A possible translation could be: "And then place another subtle area on top of it, and clean the ends of that if you wish." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
When you have finished the operation, place the patient in the same position as before, and make sure it is comfortable for the sole of your shoe so that your work is declared, which is a delicate and small operation.
Then insert the needle into the hole of the pelvis that needs to be tightened, and make sure it penetrates deeply into the eyelid so that the excess fat is extracted from that natural part of the pelvis.
Then pull the pelvis inward and insert the other one into the axial canal, and there should be one or two, not more than that.
Then pull the needle out that is inside the pelvis, and make sure it is not caught in the axial canal in the eyelid of the natural part of the pelvis.
If you are not caught in the axial canal and the pelvis is not caught, you will pull the axial canal at the parts that are left after you have finished the trauma of the wound that was caused by the trau sobira.
And see if that is the case, and if you pull the axial canal and the wound is closed, and close it with clamps, and leave it for two or three days, until the pelvis adheres to its place and covers that good flesh.
If the penis is too short, you should adjust it with a longer natural penis, and raise it if it seems to enter that space appropriately, and then you should lift it.
Capitulum XXX.
Of the treatment of conjunctivitis that appears in the eyelid.
When inflammation appears in the eye, and the eyelid contracts when pressed on, either to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plague or of a sore or cauterization, and this is called conjunctivitis, whether it is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of the plague or of the sores or of cauterization, or because of its resemblance to them.
May the forceps of the operation in it be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place them in it as soon as they are between those two mechas of drapery, and tie them there when they are healed.
And you do not need to use cure for the eye of its causes that dry it out, constrict; rather if you make it so that it returns to inflammation with pus that no time has fire without.
When using the remedy for that cause which softens the flesh, and mixes with water the urine of the patient, or the urine of another person, the one which is liquefied and is like the oil of the olives, and submerge it in that mea, and care for it.
And the recipe of your cure is that you pierce all the parts that are not solidified according to the form that focuses at the beginning.
And this operation which they have said is not any correction of ehalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to the focus at the beginning.
Chapter 124.
Of the cure of ehalixacrati which is made on the eyelid.
This ehalixacrati which is made on the eyelid, which is truly called ehalixacrati; and it is either of the natural kind, or of the accidental kind.
Most accidental ehalixacrati are made by plague, or by cutting, or by cauterization, or by other like means.
The method of the operation of the patient is that you take a loop in which it makes double, and fix it in the flesh, and that the bandages pass from the lacrimal of the left to the lacrimal of the right, entering that fil passes through the ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh to the parts desired by the loop and cut it with that loop, and insert it into the wound. And then if you return the figure of the eyelid according to what is covered, and if not, take the lens and fix that in the figured part, and make that convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two fissures of the two angles of the wound are such that it has made in between when they coincide, and that one of them is an angle when they come together, and that figure of theirs is.
This figure is Greek: the letter.
And then remove the flesh from that according to the quantity of the lid's edge, so that it closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with thread; and cure those that have been told of the mollifying medicines and the calgs within which they were once unhealthy.
And if you use an incision or suture or cauterization, then you should know that you are making a flat cut over the eyelids according to what has been said. And then separate the calg from between the two lips according to what has been said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of alxacrati when it is desired or done, that runs in the operation, according to what has been prepared by the form of alxacrati, and that is in the form of different motions.
And the artificer saves time preparing an engine in each hand that is possible to enter when it returns the figure to its natural form or part of it, and that one is according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the larger positions.
Capitol.xv.
Of the attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to some men who have their eyelid solidified by the album of the horse, and it is forbidden to move it or perform its natural works, then you should enter the extrusion of the eye from the eyelid, and raise it on that, or extend it with that.
And if you insert the adhesion of the spuma under it, which is not sharp like the sharpness of the scissors, it has a small part so that the thigh is not troubled by the operation, and keep the spuma that does not affect the horse with its sharpness.
And if your scissors are those that can exfoliate that adhesion, then return the eyelid to its natural form and make sure the entire adhesion is healed.
And if you put in the thigh salted water that you wash; or distill in it dissolved in water.
And if you separate the eyelid from the thigh with care and stop on the thigh, and then infuse on the album of horse, and use the third part for consolidating causes when it is healed.
The text you provided is not in the language you described, but rather in Lat
Translation: "Of the scar and the prominence of the eye lids.
You should know that unguent is made from two ingredients, one of which is nervous and resembles a thin cube; the other is not nervous, resembling a white, slightly damp substance, which when struck with a hammer or pounded, becomes easy to remove and does not leave any residue.
Always consume the spices slowly, as they cover the eye and prohibit the light and its movement.
The hand of the worker in the incision of the thigh is that it pauses the eye in the upper part, and then works the handles of the thigh, and raises the eyelid to your thumb, and then applies the unguent with a small amount of duplication and extends it to the parts below. And then hold an agula and enter it into the same pelvis of a horse or a buffalo or a frog, or of something similar, or of a sharp point, or doubles the extremity of the agula little by little and places it in the meat of the unguent, and pierces it with the agula and makes it firm with the unguent; and extends it to the parts below, and scrapes off the pelvis of the unguent which is the pupil. When you follow that for the inside of the knee.
And if you insert the ramus in the socket of the lacrimal bone subtly or with small forceps, and examine the cartilage of the lacrimal bone naturally to see if by inserting it there are continuous fluxes of continuous lachryms.
And if someone shows you the gland on the inner part or on the side, and says that it has been done, and that it is this form of the gland:
And watch that you do not touch the corneal layer and that it is in the rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
And if the insertion is made in the wound a little salt is sprinkled or dipped in pus, and it is examined the next day; and the treatment of that is done as soon as it is healthy.
And if the gland is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not located in that place, then this type of gland is cured by medicine and is healed as you have been told in the division.
If you wish to separate that (part), then you should open the thigh and place smooth, sharp thorn of acute pointedness according to this form: I understand. Here is the translation of the source sentence: If that part is rarified and confined and penetrates into the same place, then you distill from your hand into the thigh of the sacrifice or the other part of the rog or the salted one, and fill the thigh within another day.
Then repeat the operation over that part when it is completely done, unless that contrary to the aposteme be in the thigh, and then you should lay hold of that, and cure the beginning as soon as it becomes sound.
And repeat your operation over that part until it is completely healed.
The tear of the lacrimal cartilage, if it is noticed in the thigh for great pain, should be suspended on one side; and then separate that part and do not leave the separation so that you do not separate any flukes of the scars.
And if you distill in the tear duct roof and make sinus enter if it is healthy.
Chapter 17.
Of the scarification of aloe and of the water that is born from the flesh adjusted in the heel.
Some wounds in the heels of aloe are born from flesh, and are placed over it when it covers the pupil or is approached or torn over the eyelids, or the eyes are closed with parts deformed and assembled on the edge of a balustrade.
Measure the operation on that side because the thigh does not allow you to see in the upper part; and cut the wounds of that and close them all on that flesh convenient for the water, and use a forceps or a tweezer; and scarify the flesh at the beginning when everything is finished inside, and keep the heel that does not touch that for your operation.
And is your scarification at the place where you scarify those or at the spatula which they recommend in the scarring of the unguent, or at small forceps which are closed according to the form of that this chapter has.
When the wound is fully filled and closed, and the entire flesh is covered with sal water, or distilled in the powdered roga, or resembles the powder of the corrosive medicines, and place your hand over the wound to prevent it from getting infected with gangrene.
If Roman alguacil recognizes any cause of gangrene and is careful to use cautery, and fears gangrene cautery, then cut the wound and treat that gangrene as it should be treated, and afterwards cover that wound with a dressing made of the skin that has been affected in this special case.
But mayhaps you cover the entire cure of the wound by natural or accidental means, and do not mean to operate on it in any of these operations until you see that member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of collection of salt in the wound.
Salt comes from powdered roga which are smooth on the wound and prohibits the washing of the operation, and opens the wound in days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the pain is in the quality that is hard and not another type of wound, then you gather that kind of wound.
And is it that you command the thigh to hold the head upright, and suspend those veins as close as possible, and be sure that this one is of a subtle duplication according to this form:
or so two other ones gradually in another part according to this form:
And you gather those veins as soon as possible, with subtlety and subtility, and remove the pain as soon as you see those veins to be relieved of the wound and be refreshed.
And keep in mind that you do not treat the wound with the extremities of the stump; and if your operation is on the outside, and you have to hold fast in your operation without any other veins besides those.
And when you have completed it, you distill in the highest part of the wound or on the other side to make sure that this one is becoming more sharp and relieved of the pain.
If it is not possible for you to collect all of this in one sitting, and you apply all of this that relieves the pain of the patient, and you wait for several days after the pain has subsided and the patient has been secured against the risk of bleeding.
And continue over the second that the medical personnel enters when the patient is cured.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing the head of the nose.
When you treat the nose with cauterization or acute medicine, follow this after the narration of the pain and do not engage in it unless you first apply pressure on the curette to the maturity of the pain, and remove all the moisture that is in it and it will be inside when the bone is discovered.
And when the bone is discovered in the corruption or blackening, you should then cut it with a tool of this form:
And it is called a sharp point, and it is made of iron, and it is rounded like the one that is made by punctuating with a needle or a surgical blade by puncturing subtly (like in the following form).
When you pause that over the corrupt location of the bone, and turn it around among the soft parts, and press your thumb little by little until you know that this suppuration is formed.
And if it is any wound, and then restore the place with causes of drying and stretching.
If the place is consolidated and is good flesh in the wound and the body of the sickness is cut out and stays for 40 days, and it is not renovated and not patched and does not happen again in the accident, then you know that it is healed.
However, you should not be in the wound unless you reduce the fissure to the form of a nose, and according to this method: and it is that you discover from second bone or from acute medicine, and when you discover the bones, you take tribo second in this form:
If the extraction of the bone is triangular, and it was the first one to be stretched into the end as many times as possible.
And then place that over the bone, and that is from the lacrimal; and along with your hand a little of the hazel, and turn your hand with the tribe as it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the wound because it has turned back in the way that has turned back when you were there.
Then, restore the location of the medicinal ointments that are drying out the skin as you would have used.
When the flesh is enduring pain, you should return the matter that has spread to the surrounding parts back to its original position, therefore, place your hand on the thighs.
Chapter 20.
Of reducing the prominence of the heel.
When the heel is prominent in its entirety and does not occur in the process of becoming null or diminished, you should lift the thighs, and then follow the path that follows, and then place the ventouse on the chest, and apply a liniment made of acatr, aloe, ensea, and sarcocolla, and then tighten the grip on the heel with powder.
And the hand of the powder is what you hold from the leopard's hooves, and each hoof is doubled into four plates; and make of these plates.
And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the heel requires. When you apply pressure to those hard, dry parts; and repeat the winding around his incisions; and then remove the windings and loosen the tight clothing of the day and night.
When the tendon is softened, you should make sure it is straight.
And cut the tendon at the appropriate time and in the way that has been said.
If the heel has already been reduced, then do so, and if not, then apply plaster to the powders and the stricture and the wounds that have entered and are becoming healthy.
Chapter 21.
Of the inscription of the eminence of the uvea tunic.
When there is a rupture in the uvea tunic, and it becomes elevated and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a grain of sand, and its shape changes, and you want to inscribe it, then perform the operation on that side as has been recommended, that you enter the hinge into the edge of the uvea from the side where you end, and place another hinge in the place of the lacrimal double part, and make it penetrate and lay the first hinge according to its disposition; and inscribe the location of the double hinge and raise that part of the uvea in the circuit of the hinge, and tighten that part.
When you have extracted the uterus and placed it on the injected albumen in the book, enter quickly when the thread comes out of the grape vine.
And care for the uterus as this is comfortable for the person inside when the plague is cured.
Some veins are found in the whole part of the uterus, within a circle of drap around the uterus, and they pass through the subtle pus that comes to the preon of the uterus, and run along the humid humorous tissue, and descend the uterus and enter it.
And stretch it when it is cured.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of gallstones.
This malady called gallstone is not simply the water that is adjusted in the uterus, resembling water from descending waters, and it is not that one.
The most difficult part of operating on the uterus is to seize it with the forceps and hold it, and then see if the water comes out through the parts that you see, and it should be dry and not descend, and there should be light, and this water will show the causes as they were.
If it does not go down below, you know that it is wet.
If the descent to the anus is not prepared, as they have said, then make the thighs approach each other and place a thin piece of sponge under it and put it over the cornea of the eyeball, in the corneal tunic (within the socket), within which the sore may be forgotten.
Then when it is forgotten, you distill the water from the tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already built fennel and honey.
And this cure is applied to the other causes within which it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
The treatment of the water from the tail.
As they have said, the specifics of the water in the division and what is convenient to declare, you do that second for the health.
You should make the thighs approach each other on a pillow and place the tail in the hindmost part of the thigh.
Then place your hand a little behind the eyelid of the tail that has the water in the right part; or if it is on the left, then in the left part.
And if you have the right hand open, hold it with your left; or if you have the left hand open, hold it with your right.
And pause the extremity of the magnum at the edge of the corona for the largest bone in the album of the hinge of part of the lacrimal bone, and place your hand on it to support it and turn it with yours.
And penetrate into the album of the hinge and feel that your hand has already been introduced due to the wound.
And make sure that the size of the glove's opening is equal to the size of the pupil that goes into the end of the black, and it is the crown of the hinge; then you will see the pupil at the sight of the hinge because of the clarity of the cornea's tunic.
And place your hand inside the location where the water is, and then you will see another vein below, and if the water descends so much, then you will see the mouth of this water on the side that has the most sight, and the glove on the hinge.
When a small amount of urine is excreted, then if the urine descends, you should remove that other tube that has not been plugged yet.
When you are dry and not descending, then remove that plug with ease, and roll it around a little, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gypsum in the urine and rinse the urethra; and place a piece of cloth or linen soaked in rose oil and albuminous wool and ligature around the hollow.
We and those of our time who have passed over this which has been eaten of our albuminous wool are in the same category.
And if you do not obey my advice to insert the tube into the urethra due to its hardness — which is common among men whose urethra is hard — then I advise you to take this sponge, which is called the "bladder" of the above, and this is the form:
Then perforate that conjuncture, and do not leave the tube inside, and if you do not have to, then insert it under the plug in a soft place.
And then enter the magdalene second as they have said.
You must prepare the compliment of your work, whether it is in a bed that is comfortable for the patient to lie on, with their back on the bed, and is not allowed to move at all.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If the limb follows its own disposition into the third day.
When you have approached that dark chamber and extinguished the flame seen, and look at some causes, and then return the limb within the thigh.
And it does not matter if you do this in the time of the ceremonies or enough at the infusion. It is necessary that you use this for so that the water falls on the ground with great and violent regard.
If you have an abscess, it is necessary that you let the pus drip out within seven days, and then correct that water that gives the abscess.
If you have closed the sight of him and placed your hand on his face for the one who is regulating the vision from the future, he exists in that dark chamber.
And then his gait will be descending gradually and conversing about his causes.
And you know that in the alchemy there is not excused the disciple of vision some visions, and then you have angered about the operation.
And it has come to us of the alchemy of those who are in the Artach, and the alchemy said that they make fire in the Ayrac magnanimous by perforating the one that succeeds the water.
When I say, "Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel," it translates to:
This are the forms of the species of mustard per that is over those, which ignores those:
When pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This subtlety is triangularly extended from the extremity to the other, with an acute angle at its end, as in this case.
Capitol, section 24.
Of the treatment of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are various hardened flesh pieces of which one is the cause, which is assembled with Scorpio of motz feet or polyp eyes; and this malady is called polypus, as it resembles that eye represented. And of the flesh it is blackish, like cancer or a lapadea, and not of the color of lion's flesh.
Therefore, if in these flesh there is no cancer or lapadea, it is best to make the malady between your hands and place it under the sun, and humble the tips of the nails, and point the tip of the finger in those flesh. And if it is extracted from those parts, and if you cut it according to what you have understood of the hardened flesh of one part, and if you know that all the flesh has been removed; then, if the cause allows for an abscess, you must cut it with one of the subtle instruments with ease within which of the causes of the Roman. If the lady has a wound or accident on her arm, then you should stop and rest that part; it is from the malignant boils, then you cut and cauterize that which is infected and leave the cavities empty.
When the patient's nose is swollen and the incision is red and wet, it means that the body is reacting to the surgery. It is important to keep the area clean and apply a cold compress if necessary. If the patient If the nose is cleaned and the surgical procedure has moisture enter the mouth, it means that the patient has already recovered.
When humidity does not penetrate beyond the skin, you should know that the flesh of nothing is found in the subcutaneous bones of the bodies of those who have not undergone abscission.
Then cover the wound with a damp cloth, apply a poultice of herbs to it, and stop at every point in the quantity of the said or message, and enter the abscess and insert an extremity of the flesh into the arm at the elbow or at another part of the body where this is possible.
And suppose that this will have been done, that the odorant is introduced into the canals of the arms, and is placed over the golier, which is too visible for the children to see at school, and is a cause for that which is being done.
And stop the two extremities of the wound, one that goes over the nose and the other that runs along the nose, and apply firm pressure to the flesh that is in the wound, and suppose that you know that the flesh is already in the wound.
And if you extract the tooth, and place it on the nose, and make an incision in the gum, and leave it for three days or more, until the entire area around the tooth has healed.
And at the end of the treatment, place a cotton ball in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you need more extensive care, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument used by the barber to remove unwanted hair, which consists of oils and medicines in the nostrils.
And make it of silver or gold, which looks like a small lantern light, as small as possible, and the meat looks similar.
And if you want, make a cotton ball closed as a cane, and the cotton ball of the barber's instrument for hair removal is flat, open; at which you hold it with your hand when you scrape off the oil or water that you want from the secretions and causes.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
The text you provided is in Occitan, a Romance language that was spoken in the southern part of France and parts of Italy
The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "Women's faces are born in the extramittars of the nose, and they are magnificent and beautiful on most days when the day comes to see the look of the one.
The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "And for that reason, you insert that at the beginning of the appearance of the one, and you take all of that. The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "And then stop over the place or cauterize or use medicine that was in the place of the one.
The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "If it is delayed the insertion after it is magnificent, consider if it is made, hard, of black color and few sentiments, you do not touch that with iron that is apostema crancos; for those women's faces that are inserted this apostema ever by the great malice over that which that had.
The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "And if the apostema is of the lion and not of black color, and sometimes it is possible to insert it in all that, you remove the thigh and insert this senes fear, and cure the place as much as possible that is empty and close when it is healthy.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the source sentence "Capitol.
The translation of the given medieval medical treatise line by line in English is as follows:
You should know that when you encounter a solution for continuity in one of these cartilages, it is not uncommon to see this operation in only a few people.
Then, when you find any of those causes, if you consider it to be fresh pain under the jaw, and adjust the lips of the wound with suture, and then care for that part which is healed.
And if the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated, and each one is healed, then you should know that you should excoriate each part of its apparent wound inside when it is clean. And then adjust the lips of the wound with suture and tighten them, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and essences, and place a powdered plaster on it or another consolidated plaster, and press it for two days or three, and then remove that and exchange the plaster and press it inside so that those parts may separate for themselves if they are separated, and care for it when it is healed.
When the hand of the suture is that which you add to the solution of continuity or with needles as they have recommended in the suture of the stomach, or add the solution of continuity with your own and make it known to you.
Chapter 27.
Regarding the extraction of those causes that enter into the lips of the teeth in the parts of the dentine.
Waves are seen in some men in the parts of the dentine of their lips, where hard points resemble hard nails, and some are softer and some are larger.
Therefore, cover the lips and fingers of each of those hard points in the entire part, and apply the dressing to fill the space between that which is restrained, and apply its wash to it and treat the place with what is astringent, within which is sutured, if it is cured.
Chapter 28.
Regarding the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Great waves are seen over the adjusted flesh of the gum that the ancients called alabaster, therefore, cover that with a bandage or have it covered with a bandage and inscribe its size on its place and let the suture run or the suture.
And pause over the area that has been dug or another powdered or excitating substances.
And if that flesh returns, you insert it secondarily and cauterize it, and place the cauterization so that it does not return.
Chapter 29.
Of reason for teeth made of iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts that are too long, the gums and between the gums there are rough, hard, and some are black and are called yellowish or verdigris within which the gum is corrupted and the long teeth are the cause.
And so you cover the thighs between your legs and place the head of the patient on the top, and remove those teeth in which those rough and cause-like stones appear, and that are not caused by any other reason, and that is either black or yellowish and others that are deformed.
And if that is the case, then so be it; and if not, you repeat the reason over those other days and times and enter again when you want to reach the end of the statement.
You should know that teeth require various types of incisions and figures, according to the preparation for your operation. For so that the razors can reach the teeth of the jaw, and the razors that are used to shave the teeth in another way, these forms of razors must be prepared which you will use most often:
Capitol .xxx. is not a complete sentence or phrase,
This is a Spanish phrase that translates to "Removal of teeth" in English. It refers to the process
Cover that you cure the tooth of its pain as much as possible and throughout the entire removal of it, where no cause is found that supplies the vein of it when it is removed, where there is a substance that enters and exits during the removal of it.
When the tooth is ready to be extracted, which tooth it is that is causing pain, four witnesses are needed to certify which tooth is the painful one, and then the tooth that is diseased is removed and the pain ceases within the tooth that is still diseased and has been removed, as we have seen in operations on beards.
Thus, when you need to certify what tooth is painful and whether you know how, if you cover the area where you scrape with your hand in the circuit of the tooth as it is in the gingiva of the whole part, then enter if that tooth has been dissolved from the tooth of the gingiva, or if it is sharp at the beginning, little by little entering until it converges to that concavity.
Then, if you find it too difficult for good conversation or if there is too much pain in the head between the teeth that you hold which do not hurt you, and then treat the tooth secondarily with the hand that does not disturb it, nor cause more pain to the other jaw.
And then, if you do not forget, use one of those instruments, and place it on the tooth so that it is easy to remove the root that is made at the beginning.
If the tooth is swollen or burned, cover that area with your hand and firmly press on the end of the root with your thumb to prevent it from being crushed under the pressure of your lips in the moment of your closure over that tooth.
When you are working on excision very carefully with sharp dissection in the circumference of the entire gingiva and keep your strength so that it does not weaken or tear that part of the body, and return over the thigh for the greater pain of the patient.
And be careful not to do what barbers do in their shaving and boldness over the eradication of them, since they do not follow what has been recommended; four ways come for the great men who are difficult to trim, and all their faces are improved, or some of those, or that one is taken from the bone of the mandible as witnesses have testified.
And if the eradication of him is washed the mouth with vinegar or vinegar and salt.
And if there is any flow of blood, as witnesses have testified, then take a certain quantity of iodine and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and their subtlety are such that the tooth begins with a long extrusion, a thin handle and a large one, so that they do not bend when used to operate on those parts.
And they are like times of a large handle that enters when the teeth are not bent, they are thin extractions.
And the pain of Indian iron is like the pain of the teeth that are thin extractions, and in the extractions of those there are teeth of the ones that some are inserted into others and are stretched by a strong descent force, and some are seen in the extractions of those is the form of the beak of an owl which has been called gallinagus, it is a strong constraint.
Capitol. xxxi.
Of the eradication of teeth and of the stretching of the bones of the tridented jaws.
When the eradication of the tooth that is tridented in Roman law is due to some cause, you have to place your hand over the area where it borders by one day or two, and enter or tighten the forceps on the extractions of those that are assembled at the beak of an owl called gallinagus or a similar bird, the form of the forceps:
When the symptoms of their joint pain are like those of cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
If you do not obey my instructions and use these forceps or tools, you will find that I am holding the edge of the wound and tearing through all the flesh and inserting the instrument that is called this one, which is a small lever with this form:
It has a thin end and is not bent, but straight.
If the wound is forgotten, it is; and if not, help me with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangle with an extremity that is a large one.
The form of the second instrument is that it is a triangle with a subtle extremity.
And now help me with this instrument, which has two slopes and the form of the following is: And I will help you with other instruments that you should use when shaving teeth; this one is assembled like the large one and the form is:
When the tip of the triangle is tortuous or short, and it is not flat, it is not suitable for this purpose.
And other wisdom that these teeth instruments are like the others.
The skilled and subtle artisan suffers because he does not know what to do with the operation and the different diseases; four are of those diseases that the ancients did not have or use different instruments for their various species.
If the bone of the jaw or the other bones of the mouth are not flat or if they are swollen, then it is necessary to be careful about that in its place as much as possible that is convenient for the instruments and forceps that have been said in the extraction of the teeth, and this is the way:
And if there is any small swelling little by little, and it is pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak out because the entire bone is forgotten; and then restores the location with appropriate medications for this.
When a small fracture is found in the bone, you should note down that detail and its severity, and treat it accordingly to make it heal.
Capital, Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth in relation to others.
When prominent teeth do not follow the natural course of the jaw, and this is more common in women and especially in those of a sacred age; therefore, I advise you to consider: if the tooth is nothing else but another tooth and it is not possible to reduce or apply a linament to it, then you should treat that one. However, if it is not annexed to another tooth, then you should insert this one into this instrument of which this is the form; and it seems like a morsel of pork, and it is made of Indian iron of extramittance mot aguda.
And is your insertion at the point where you insert it for too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not suitable for other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exfoliated, then you should apply iron of Indian type to that point, as this is the form.
When all is said and done, it is made of Indian iron and the handle; and it has points like those that are caused by joint pain, like the tip of a needle, which is worn down over time due to the difficulty of the work, so that no other tooth can be cut or broken. And place those in the hole, and fit them with those razors.
And if the tooth is broken and the tongue is licking it, you should make sure that the edge of that piece is not sharp and not gnawed, and is covered so that the tongue does not corrupt and the word does not become corrupted.
Capitol, Chapter 33.
For the restoration of damaged teeth, use gold or silver.
When the teeth in front are damaged by concussion and displacement due to percussion or hammering, and the mouth cannot be held over it with the hand, and you have treated that with medicinal stitches, but your treatment has not worked, then do as follows: use gold wire, not silver, because silver does not hold well in those that are strong, and if it is made of silver, it will turn green and become dirty after a while, but gold does not change over time.
If the female is in such a subtle and grievous manner that she allows it to enter between her teeth; and the form of the grip is that you grasp the female and hold the double of her between healthy teeth, and as much as possible, the curvature of the female's teeth between the bad ones, or if one or more, enter that the cloth passes through the healthy tooth of the other part. When you approach the affected area, stretch your hand as much as possible and know that it may not be comfortable.
When your tight belt is in place, make sure it is not too tight and does not cause discomfort.
Then insert the excess thread into the forceps or tweezers and attach it to any location on the handle, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth, so as not to cause injury to the tongue. And follow that advice as if it were Roman law.
If it slips or tears, tighten that or those with another belt in that manner for the entire time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the dental arches of healthy and bad teeth, as follows:
And when you return a tooth or teeth to their sockets in the appropriate places and they regrow as advised, they will remain.
And this is all that can be done by artists and surgeons.
And some bones are suitable for cattle bones and are made in the form of teeth, and are placed in a location where the tooth lacks, and are strengthened as advised, and remain and serve for a long time.
The given text is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.
This language is a form of medieval Latin, and the sentence translates to: "This ligament that I see some eyes or is natural by the quality that this man has, or accidental and accidents due to the plague that has already been solidified.
The operation on this part is to open the mouth of the patient, and there should be no existence in the upper part; raise the tongue, and then insert that nerve cord following the latitude after the tongue of the recent one has been solved.
When there is any pain or inflammation, and this has been done for the consolidation of the plague, then you should cut off that part and separate it at the latitude where the incision has been made in the limb and the nodosity has been dissolved.
You must ensure that there is no gap in the skin of the flesh and that it does not split here and allow the sinews to flow out.
And wash the wound with wine, vinegar, or vinegar; and then put down the tongue of the licent; and it is made such that holds the pain in any way so that it is not reinforced by another touch.
If there is a flow of sinews, place over the area where the cavity was made; and if the sinews are coming out, then burn the area with a pointed cautery, as it is suitable for this purpose. And this treatment should be applied to other causes that may be causing the pain.
Capital, Chapter XXXV.
From the extraction of gallstones, put down the tongue.
Some touches cause the tongue to be pulled out, which prevents it from performing its natural operation; and it is greatly magnified when it is swollen in the mouth.
And the operation in the tongue is that it swells the mouth of the patient in front of the soleil and considers the aphthous.
If you see that it is of a dark or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in that part, do not touch that one.
If it becomes white in color and there is moisture, you should put the point in that part, and insert a small piece of sponge underneath, and insert the rest of the instrument; and if you feel any resistance during your operation, you should pause and take out the instrument, as it may be stuck in the sponge.
And then return to your work when you have finished with the complement of the patient, and when it is washed and dry, take care of that part in another cure as soon as it is healthy; and if it becomes inflamed during the operation, stop and treat it immediately.
Chapter 36.
Regarding the extraction of the hemorrhoids of the female buttocks and of those that are not in the anus and of the others.
When you cut in the anus, it is glands that are gathered together like cloth, which become deformed and are female hemorrhoids, which when you treat them according to what has been said in the division and they are not cured, you should consider if the hemorrhoid is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, you do not touch that one with iron.
If the question is about color and the fat is large, do not touch that with your finger for the flow of the sinus; rather lay it aside within its mature state, and either you or she will handle it later.
If the question is about whiteness and the fat is thin, do that which is to be concealed.
The operation in you is that which you consider, taking into account the completion of the scar or if it has diminished due to any diminution; and you should seize the thigh by the sole of your foot, and the chin of the patient should be in the upper part, and the server takes between his hands the tongue of the patient further away from the instrument of noble quality of which this is the form:
If it is made of silver or gold, and it is thin like silk.
Then how you hold the tongue and show it to you the scar, and cover that with your thumb and fix it in that position, and pull that through the parts as much as possible. Another cause for tearing the membranes, and applying that force with this instrument, is when the child is born with the head down.
Another cause for tearing the membranes, and applying that force with this instrument, is when the child is born with the head down. It is assembled like forceps, but the parts that are extruded are curved, so that the orifice of one of those is at the end of the other, which is sharp, and made of iron.
If this instrument is not at your disposal, insert that sharp point of the instrument with which this is formed of the child's head: And it should be sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
And perhaps you have inserted a honeycomb, insert the other according to this hand-made insertion point, and then the insertion should be guarded by wet feces.
If perhaps there is a flow of pus, guard it with wet feces, and if the pus flow is restricted, cure it within that pus flow, and make it healthy.
And some vessels may be found in the groove of other stitches or in the same ones that you have mentioned for the honeycomb insertion, and insert those according to what you have said in the insertion of honeycomb stitches.
When I have already treated a female with apoplexy, which was born in the abdomen of her, this apoplexy tended towards a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the abdomen of her, and the woman breathed straight, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and it had been brought to death by many days or two.
When the aposteme had already suffered so much that it had made several deep cuts in its passage through two tracts.
Then carefully and remain in one of the holes, take out that, and pull it gently, and tear it off from the large piece, and then carefully insert that into the other wound, and then carefully close the mouth of the post, and chew on its tongue, and then leave the hole in the aposteme.
And then close a large portion of it, and do not run out of it except for a little blood. Indeed the rule of that woman, and then began to drink so much water, and then eat less, therefore you did not stop inserting into that post many times for a long time, and that post was in its place instead of that, which was inserted when it was prolonged there.
Therefore you apply hot and cauterize the rule of that woman, therefore also this addition; and then you walk around and do not wash what God made of that prop.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in Latin, Italian,
When the hernia is being examined.
When catarrh occurs in the throat, and it is long and wide, then it is called a "node" if it is located at the end of the large and round part; and if it is located at the beginning of the small and pointed part, it is called a "gout".
When the disease is cured, and it is said that they have cut in the division, and it does not comfort your cure, and you see that the opening of the abscess has already been made and is subtle, then you cover the wound with a cloth that is sewn to what has been added round; and if it is at the end of that length, and it bleeds, of a dark color or black, and not to the heart, you cover the wound with the stitch, and in that you have fear for the thigh.
And when you see that second hand that you told of its whiteness and length, that you make to sew the thigh and press the tongue of the same with the instrument by which it processes its form and appertains the onion in the new, and take that down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called in the insertion of two mells.
And cover that only with this if it is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, for if you cover less of it, you will lose the ability to speak.
And after covering it, use that which has been recommended in the two-hole incision, and care for that inside as it becomes healthy.
If the thigh was swollen due to the incision, cover that which uses an iron in the cauterization of its fear, and the hand of the cauterant on it should not be but sharp cold water, and it is that you hold the mouth of the thigh in the upper part, and press the tongue with the instrument that has been said, and press sharp water that has been said in the capitol of cauterization, and make sure that this live one lives, and stop that not thin nor subtle, and fill that concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
The extraviation of the cavity should be as the cavity of a culver of ray, and place the instrument of medicine on the vessel, and the thigh should be placed on the side per that which corrosive saliva or musellage of the mouth of that through intrinsic medicine, per so that not cause that same degree over the gallbladder of him and that descends from that.
When you approach the patient's throat, apply the medicine there, as that part of the body has space for about an hour after the pain subsides and becomes dull due to the doctor's treatment.
If you wish, take the scalpel and wrap it around the end of the finger, and insert the scalpel into the medicine, then enter the finger into a cannula through which the scalpel adheres to that cannula, and make as many cuts as you can until you get the desired number of cauterizations on the grape, and apply the appropriate amount of dressing that will dry and fall off in three days or four.
If you are told to repeat the treatment, repeat it, and remove the cauterization from the circuit of the grape with the scalpel inserted into the border, modify that amount of medicine that is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with water, and care for the wound with antiseptic, and disinfect the surrounding area when it is healed.
This special treatment is saved because I inserted it and made it long for fear.
This appears to be a medieval medical text describing various treatments for different conditions. Here's a line-by-line translation:
When the cold air passes through the mouth of the patient and reaches the uvula, it blocks the airway.
Then apply over the dry area and make sure you do not cause this cure to fail due to the tightness of the girdle, as too much will adjust in the girdle, and do not think that you are doing it, but rather the declaration of the girdle of the cauterization.
If you do not have this instrument present, take a cane and make a closure of the hood, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the closure of the hood prevents the cold air from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Capitulum .xxxviii.
Of extracting spines and of what sticks to the groin and of other causes.
Dry areas stick to the groin or spine of the eye or any other cause.
Therefore, make sure you extract what appears to be in those areas, over which the tongue covers the sight, as you first put the tongue on the instrument, so that it is declared to you that it is in the groin.
When the patient does not show signs of being in labor and is hidden in the room, it is likely that the woman is vomiting because the food she ate is unpleasant in her stomach. Or that the woman defecates with a douche of water or a laxative of senna leaves, or takes a douche of seawater from Leon's sea lion, and holds it for a long time until the mucus transfuses to that place where her intestines are extracted, and then it is withdrawn. And you may catch an eel and hold it for a long time until the vomit is excreted, and then it is extracted; or catch a porpoise and hold its meat and water for a long time.
If the woman is not vomiting due to those causes that have been said, then you should use an instrument of this form:
And it may be large and have a small opening, and during the extraction of the child, the mouth is made more accessible by you.
When the patient's arm is raised above their head, and you guard the point of the elbow where it meets the shoulder, so that it does not hurt the bone or the spine, or so that the doctor can adjust the sling.
However, that patient's foot is misshapen, because of its knowledge of the location of the cause and how it causes pain to be pushed downwards, and removes the hand from there using the instrument, as soon as the necessary quantity has been prepared.
Chapter 39.
Of extracting the swelling attached to the gallbladder.
When the physician prescribes bloodletting for gallbladder swelling, consider that in the groin of the patient's foot, because you have expanded the tongue of the instrument that the doctor has recommended to you.
If you see the swelling, extract it gently or with subtle movements.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it, insert a concave cannula into the groin of the patient's foot, and place a heated iron on the concavity of the cannula, and make as many punctures (while the swelling is still alive and located in the groin) and abstain from giving too much water.
And if you take a full mug of water and work it into the mouth of the patient in that way, and clean the mouth with it; and do not neglect to rinse the mouth thoroughly and wet the throat with a little water another time, as often as you see the patient swallowing the water.
If it is not forgotten that they have recommended, you should smoke the thighs with cimiter or asafetida per the instrument they have recommended in the smoking of the uvula.
Do this, it is said in another way.
And this is another way of operating in smoking, as you take a roll made of charcoal and coal and wrap it in a covering made of a cap on the top of the instrument; and then remove the smoking; and place the thigh at the end of the canula and close the mouth so that the smoking is not forgotten until you know that the smoking is pervading the sanctuary, as often as the sanctuary cries out.
If the patient does not have a fever, then you should perform sublingual massage motions, avoid putting pressure on the thighs, eat salty foods and drinks, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that this diet be followed outside of the body.
This is the form of the instrument used to treat the gallbladder when seen; and it resembles forceps, but it does not have any curvature in it. The instrument that is placed on the gallbladder and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is sharp, in which there are scratches from lime, when one comes across any cause, that does not last.
Capital, chapter 40.
In this chapter is the sum of the sermon in accusation of apostates and in section of them.
The apostates are special movements, of manual movements, according to what is remembered of them, from each in this free one.
And they are different in perforation and section by manual movements, of which one is for the specialty of apostates in them puts; and therefore, when you come across water.
And the second hand is properly placed on the parts where the wounds occur on the body, as the accident in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and the accident in the fleshy part of the thigh is different from that in the joint; and to each of them, the operation is performed differently.
And some wounds may be those that are not pierced but are of proper maturation of the sinus in those or parts of them.
And other wounds are those that are not thorns but are of proper maturation of the sinus in those or parts of them. And if you delay the perforation of the member, it is because the sinus is not mature enough; and it does not cover what is not a result of decomposition, but rather that which is proper to the buttocks, so that the bone does not break and becomes elongated in the parts of the buttock, or it is a fistula or a fistula at the end of the member that is not healthy. When you know the time for the puncture of the gallbladder, and it is ripe.
When you know that the diarrhea of the pain and the cessation of the fever, and the decrease in the tremor and pulse, and the sharpness of the gallbladder head, and the other symptoms.
And when you know that the puncture is made in the place behind the gallbladder and from the healing of the eminence comes out.
And the puncture should be made in the depth of the meat or the chest, if the gallbladders are in the parts of the thighs or feet, and in places where there are no reflections; and in all those that do reflect, use a perforation according to that member.
When the gallbladder is in the flesh, it is necessary to make a puncture when the digestion of the second complement has been confirmed; then if you puncture that part, the chest of the penis and the hard lips are prolonged, and very much the labia of the endured one and the depth of the gallbladder.
When ties or knots are cut, they are usually done second to the latitude of the flesh or body part that needs it, or according to what the member indicates.
And if you make a small puncture, and in the large knots there will be a large and deep puncture or slices according to the variety of the size of the knots.
And other knots in which the gut is convoluted and adhered, when you cut it, the end will be flat and the end will be in proportion to what has already happened, like that which occurs in many doublings and abscesses.
And of those that are not cut, there are three angles; and of those that are cut, the end has the figure of a thorn of a hedgehog, like the knots of the drawstrings.
And of those that are not cut, there are round and lunar sections, and they resemble those.
That which does not have the appearance of superficial knots like superficial leon's knots, cut it with a superficial or flat puncture, or as much as possible.
When the gallbladder is large and has already been tied, which pierces that and does not let you catch it; if a part of it has been extracted, and a part is left inside on another day, and a larger part is extracted later, and motions are made according to the degree that is forgotten.
If the patient is in a state of drunkenness, or a female press, or a small child, or an old man, and the animal spirit makes motions towards the exit of the disease, and more so the womb, and you operate on it.
Take this prescription with great caution, and your piercing in which you pierce these gallstones, cover that the plagues are driven away and consider if the plague of the gallstone is small, or a flat section, whether you administer the quarts of lip or antique horn; and if the gallstone is large, and the fissures of the piercing are motions, whether you pause mechanically in every tract that may come.
If in the abscess a part of the cord or is curved in that way in the circuit, you will know that you have completed the cut or the string as if you had cut pans or razors, with its moisture; and hold that within the third day; and proceed with that and cure the one that covers the engorged parts that were once sick.
If blood flows during the time of your operation, you should immediately administer cold water and apply it to the areas where the wounds are located, and place a cloth over the site of the flowing blood to prevent it from becoming infected.
If the blood flow persists, you should make sure that you are administering proper care and medication, and applying powder as recommended in various parts of this free and divided country.
If it is during the winter time, and the location of the blister is located on the nerves, you should make sure that you wrap the powder in cloth and place it over the areas to prevent them from becoming infected.
If it is during the summer time, and the wounds are burned, you should make sure that you place damp powder with water and oil on them, and take care of the blister as soon as possible, and remove the blister and administer proper care to the wound according to what is suitable for its healing.
And it is also necessary to know the treatment of blisters universally, but especially according to the type of blister that requires specific treatment for its cure.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you've provided is not in
The text "Capitol xli." is not a complete sentence and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be a reference to a specific chapter or section in a legal or historical document,
I apologize for any confusion, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing specific types of bets or wagers that are included in a code or legal document, along with their corresponding motions or actions. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a accurate translation.
I apologize, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing the relationship between specific bets or wagers and certain body parts, as well as those that contain humidity or I apologize, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing the relationship between specific bets or wagers and certain body parts that contain humidity or are similar to polls, as well as those that are hard or durable. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a accurate translation.
I apologize, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing the relationship between specific bets or wagers and the extraction of certain parts, as well as the fear or concern associated with this process. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a accurate translation.
When the operation is in section of those parts which you should press with that instrument of the kind that most suits, which is called an enterotome, when you know it contains.
If this is the case that there is moisture, then cut along that section according to its length by cutting it at a surface level according to this form:
Begin at the section of line .B. and go to line .G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape out that part which contains that moisture, and do not look for any other cause for this, as it may return if there is any such cause.
And if you find any Egyptian coins, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that wound with the plaster and keep it inside for another day, as this will corrode all that is seen from that film.
And repeat over that wound if you find any Egyptian coins accordingly and later if you wish, as you trust that there is no other cause for that film; then cure the wound with the plaster if it is healed.
If gout is present with large nodes, then you should insert your finger in this form: If the incision does not have a crooked form, and you place teeth between the two lips of the incision and pull on it until the entire part is extracted, and then forcefully remove the skin that contains it.
If you are having difficulty urinating, it is likely that you have a blockage in your urethra, and it is recommended to see a doctor immediately.
If the aphrodisiac seems to have caused a cut and irritation on the penis, as you have reported; and if there is a cut on the aphrodisiac, it is likely that it is caused by a small amount of sand and little moisture.
And some people are allergic to these aphrodisiacs that are on the head of men who do not have much moisture; the cause is that you became sensitized over an aphrodisiac in the head of a woman's vagina and made it hard, rough, white, which could not be stretched, and if it was given to her, it would cause pain.
In other cases, accidents have occurred in the head of the other aphrodisiac, not this one, which is similar to the aphrodisiacs that go to the heads of children and you should know the cause of these rashes, but all of this is only a superficial cut.
When stopping the incision of those who have had a lower part of their body operated on, it is necessary to alleviate the pain of the disease in the parts that have been operated on.
And apply those remedies that are suitable for the cure.
Chapter 42.
Of incisions of scrophulas which occur in the chest.
Motes visible on these splints are placed in the chest and on the armpits, and some may occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the chest, and the motes that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is given its own covering, and it appears like that in the nodes and splints of the head, and like that in the places where they have been recommended.
And the specifics of these scrofula are motes, four out of which are some that are mineral, and others that contain moisture, and some that are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that which you see as good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of water that is manifested is proper to the color of the skin, and is bad for all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the chest, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pregnant, covering that you inscribe on that superficial dry part of the part which is from the part of the body to the part of the body of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn that whole part, and extend two lips of the skin from one, or from the other if you need those, as has been said in the splints of the head, and extract a little at a time.
When caution is not taken to ensure that the vein or nerve is not pierced.
If the abscess is not inflamed, that is not adjusted to your hand, or that does not disturb the patient, and that you have not already pierced it; then if you pierce the vein or artery and prohibit it from your operation, stop in the gauze that has been tied or other powders that are left on the surface, open the gauze, and lay aside that which has been repaired and made smooth, and it will become purulent and the gauze will become purulent. When the abscess ruptures.
Then return to your operation after the abscess has been filled.
And if you are unsure about the above-mentioned indication, whether it is due to any other small abscesses, then pierce those and clean them.
And if it is near the great vein of the abscess, then do not pierce that abscess from that direction. When a person has a severe pain in their chest, it is said to be a "heart attack" by doctors.
Then fill the wound with the dressing that you have already cut in Egypt, and apply it to the wound.
If you insert that entire scrophula, you should adjust the lips of the plague and cut out as much pus as possible without causing any unnecessary damage.
If you ever notice that there is excessive swelling due to the size of the goiter, understand that you need to insert the tip of that, and then apply pressure and sew it together as it is said.
If that goiter contains humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the location of the maturement of the intestine, and then stop the perforation so that it does not leak into the chest, as they have said.
And when you apply the perforation, make sure it is well-shaped and similar to those, so that it does not cause damage to the corpus. And when you notice that the plague has already been washed, then you should care for that wound made of fleshy tissue as soon as it is healed.
Chapter 33.
From the section of the pillow of the apothecary, an accident happened to the guitar.
I cut the old part of this section in the pillow, and I have not seen anyone in our land who did that.
This is the text of the sermon.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And if the patient is afraid, then do as follows: extend the gut of the hernia as much as possible, and close it after it has passed through the canal, less evict the vessels of sanc if any cause them.
And then inscribe the line as it has been recommended; and it signifies over the incision of the canal by the flap which is of that eyelet which is of the cold humor and for the abscission of the vessel.
When the wound has been cleaned for some time.
When the time comes to reinforce the hole in which the puncture was made, add some layers of the abdominal wall of the wound, and that's all you need to do.
And apply medications that help the flesh become stronger as it heals.
Albucasis says that the sum of the speech is that exposure is not just to see that the thighs have become weak, and the thigh has come to death, and the lung has entered, and they will insert the epigastrium so that the lung breathes over the place of the wound for some breathing, and it will be saved from death.
And therefore I command the wound to be cleaned when the malady of the wound has been consumed; and that is the malady for three days; and then you must command the wound in this way, and care for it as it heals.
That is why you have seen by my advice, that a vent is made in the thigh and inserted into the lung's chest, and it was inserted into one part of the canal of the lung, and you were called for the cure of the wound, and I cleaned the wound as much as the dead flesh, and discovered the wound and cleaned the sand that was in the wound.
Then you confessed that that had not been infected by veins or by the wind, and the rain was of the plague, and cured that which had been burned.
And it would not have happened in the service if it had not caused pain in the vote, and approximately three days returned to the lordship of its possessions.
And now you say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Regarding the section over the scrotum that happens in the groin area, and it is called hernia of the scrotum.
This hernia of the scrotum is called hernia of the groin after the color of the body, and it is found in women.
And it is followed by two maneuvers, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no engine to cure.
And the accidental one is followed by two maneuvers, one of which resembles nodes grasses, and the other maneuver resembles hernia caused by narrowing of the artery, and there is fear in that one. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. When you have found that and investigated it, and if it resembles any of the fatty nodes, and is not suspended from any vein, then you should insert it into the wound as the nodes, and extract that part which contains it from the flesh and bursa; and otherwise, you should thoroughly examine all parts, and apply appropriate care to the location where healing is needed.
54th Law
Section of the species of nodes.
The nodes have specific types and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
And do you advise that there is a difference between node and exitus as doubtful?
Therefore you say that in exitus there is heat and fever and severe pain within which the heat of the superfluity is sed, and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Nor does node have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that cipher leon which is in the proper sack.
And it is followed by the color of the body, and its beginning is like a ceze and is made as an ayss with a vase, whether major or minor, and there are two species, four of which are greasy and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are specific, according to what you said in the division.
When you arrive at the care of the node, which exhorts that and inquires about that from the beginning, whatever it is called intromes, according to what is found in its form at the head, which is this one.
It is the duty of inquisition of all apostemata and nodes, and this sturment is what you hold and insert into the place where humor is present, which touches the apostema and you turn the ties saying "little by little, enter that one," knowing that the sturment has already penetrated the cavity.
And then your last is after the measure of the size of the apostema, and you extract the sturment and consider that it is in the style of the one.
And if it is forgotten the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, you must insert it in a superficial cut according to what I said in the other apostemata.
And if there is no humidity of the style of the sturment, you know that it is heavy.
And dry over it with a cut without a notch according to this form: When you are told to do so, and suspend that point on the nail, and gently clean the area around it with ease, and cover the knee or groin, if possible, over there and pull out that sore from the wound.
If something breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sore, and you must leave it as it is, and you should pull out the rest of the material inside that does not cause any disease.
If something causes a disease, either too much or too little, the wound will return according to the nature of the case.
And if you notice that something causes a small part of the body to be affected, use some powders that are sharp and corrosive, strengthen the powder, and leave it on the one that sets the cautery, and treat that with another cure within which it is healthy.
And if the wound is large, you must cut off the edges of that and treat that with this remedy to cure it.
If the wound is pulsating towards you or away from you, you must cut and hammer the place where the glass was broken that has been cut and leave it for two days or three until the pus stops and the ebullition of the salve ceases; and return to incise as much as possible that causes the wound.
The text you've provided appears to be in a language that is somewhat similar to
a medieval language, specifically Old French or Middle English. Here's the translation of the first line:
When it comes to the forms of intrusions, and they are of three kinds, which are the greatest and the smallest of them.
The form of intrusion that is greatest is this:
The form of intrusion that is smallest is this:
These are painful, of iron, of the corners of the limbs in a manner that helps to hold the intrusion in place.
And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are named after them, and one of them is called brady.
And they are of three kinds, four of which are great, smaller, and fewer.
The form of the experience that is greatest, the form of it:
The form of the experience that is smaller, the form of it:
The form of the experience that is few, the form of it:
It seems that these are for the bones and exits, and fistulas, and buboes, for that they enter those so of the bones and of other causes.
When the points are returned, they are large, like grapes, and are made up of great needles that are cut from salt, or from copper, iron, or silver, and the better ones when they are made of copper.
They are points like the black plums, which are made to open the fistulas in their cavity, which are reflected as their reflections, which are reflected at their height and at those reflections.
They are of three kinds, four times as long as the others, and the thinner ones, according to the quantity of the cavity and the stricture of the fistula.
The form of the great plum experience:
The form of the smaller plum experience:
The form of the small plum experience:
The forms of the blisters are of special motions, four times as long as those simple ones, which have only one curve, and are of three kinds: large, few, and smaller.
And of their blisters or pimples, and of three kinds.
When those joints have curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
When they have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
It is necessary for all that to be in their place.
A simple joint has the form of a ball, while the other has the form of a cone.
The form of a large joint has two curvatures. The form of a hinge has two curvatures. The form of a joint has two curvatures.
The form of a large joint has three curvatures.
The form of a hinge has three curvatures.
And these are the forms of the knives that are sharp and pointed, and they have three kinds: four of them are large, one is a hinge, and one is a joint.
The first source sentence is not provided in the text you've given. However, I can
The translation of "Forma del scapel migier" is "Shape of the larger sc
The translation of "Forma de scapel pauc" is "Shape of the smaller scal
The translation of "Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquells sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema" is:
This is one of the forms of maggots, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, just like fleas.
These are the symptoms that appear and how they resemble alcohol:
And it is in the excretion of the punctured point that there is hidden sputum, and in that corner, among the parts of the teeth and gums, when you want, as you see.
The forms of maggots that are found between the teeth and not in the perforation of the gums, and there are three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventouses that are found in those where the flow of the vein is cut off, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of the ventouse:
These are the symptoms that appear, round in shape, with a certain length, and they are subtle.
When these kinds of winds are present, you must use large, medium, and small ones, so that the fast-flowing fluids can be discharged in case of necessity, and you will know what to do when it is your first time without medicine.
Do not use those winds to expel fluids from all parts of the body, and do not use them except in places where there is flesh, such as the joints of the limbs and the breasts, and the mammary glands, and the belly and the testicles and the eyes and the ears, and it seems like the flesh winds.
And some wounds are caused by those instruments that seem to be smaller and similar to scars from previous surgeries; for which you expel the fluid when it is done through a flebotomy, or you have to incise the vein or artery.
And some wounds are round in this form.
Chapter 47.
Of the cure of the breasts of men who are assembled from women.
This sentence appears to be discussing the swelling of breasts in men and women, and how it can be alleviated by wearing a garment that is similar to a corset or bustle. The phrase "compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz" seems to suggest that the garment provides support and structure to the breasts, making them appear fuller and more prominent. The sentence also mentions that the breasts of women are "assembladas" or gathered together, which could imply that the garment is designed to enhance their natural shape. The phrase "romano apostemosas" is not clear, but it may refer to some form of Roman-style bra or undergarment
This sentence appears to be providing instructions for treating a condition related to the breasts, possibly a form of mastitis or other inflammatory condition. The phrase "inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar" is not clear, but it may refer to some form of incision or cut made on the breast. The instruction to "excorja la groceza total" suggests that the affected area should be cleaned and treated with some form of medicated ointment or salve. The phrase "uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu" is not clear, but it may refer to the application of a medicated dressing or poultice. The final instruction to "ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura" suggests that the affected area should be covered with a bandage or dressing that conforms to the shape of the breast. The phrase "cura aquel entro que sia sanat" indicates that the treatment is intended to promote healing and recovery.
When the breast declines and is softened by its own magnitude, like in women, it is necessary to make incisions in two parts, in two sections resembling the lunar figure, of which each part is contained in the other, if that line which contains the smaller segment of this form of the line B. and the line G. is the major one, then excoriate the skin that is between two lips of the sore, remove the dryness, and maintain what has been said about the suture and the powders that have been given in the cure, if it becomes healthy.
And if you do not fill the incision of what is covered by the discomfort of the thigh and by flux of sinew, then it covers that the plague of the cot is submerged in the encounter of corrosion and lies therein within which that corrodes that is similar to the grayson, and maintain that within which is healthy.
Capitol Chapter XLVIII.
Of the perforation of gouts that come out of the thighs.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When those that contain humidity are present; and those that contain humidity are of such a nature that they are not cut in the lunar section of this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And as all of this is evacuated, you will find the complete curve of the cotyle and its insertion into another day.
And if the curve is whole and intact, you can enter it when it is healthy.
And if the section of the nodes' spines and scrophulas is, and if the scrophulas, you should cut over that area as has been said in the section about the scrophulas engulfment.
If the plague is extended in such a way that it causes bleeding, you should administer this cauterization as has been said in this section.
Capitulum .xlix.
Of sections of cuts that occur by arch or by vein.
When the arch is torn and the tendon is consolidated over it, then you should know that wounds and abrasions are caused by the artery or vein: four, when the wound is by arch, it is lengthened in the pre-coronary; and when it presses on the limbs, you will feel in it that it is stridor.
When that which is by vein is given to the manifest of the body, it is given to the manifest of the body.
If this section is erroneous, and particularly in the part where the ankles are cut, and the girdles, and the collar, and the other parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary that the cure be avoided, and that which is outside or at the head also be avoided.
Moreover, about that which is given to them for inflammation of the anus, they are divided in the abdomen; and it is proper that the division be unciform and that the artery be deliberated within what is discovered.
And place upon that hole and make it penetrate into the other thigh, and stretch the artery at two places, which causes and you have excessive extraction of many arteries that are in the temples.
And pour the place which is between two limbs and let it enter where it is in you, and dissolve the section.
And then, apply the cure in which the pain is generated after entering the limbs; and care for that one according to what is appropriate to heal it.
And if an abscess is caused by a vein cut, you should know that you have to hold it with your hand as possible for the abscess at the site where you have held it, and insert the needle there, and make it penetrate; and it should be in the double fil when you extract that from the other part, and tie the abscess with the limb according to what you have said to me in the limb of grape4 of two parts at the extremities of the fil.
If you think that you will extract the filament, then insert the needle through the entire abscess, and tighten the ties of the filament in four places.
Clean the abscess in the proper location of the wound when it is and is what is in it, and then insert the superfluity of the needle, and leave that which is visible of it.
And then pause over the bulb that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made of calamus and essence that is found to be healing within what is healthy.
Capitulum I of the apoplexy which occurs by twisting of nerves.
When one has had an attack of gout in the knee and in the vein, and it seems to have attacked the nerves when it is struck or when it occurs due to excessive work, and for some reason.
And it is necessary to make the point in the location of the assistant or the heel, or in all locations where the joint pain is located.
And the attack of gout is severe, and it is similar to the color of the other leg, and it is in the major parts of their disposition and when it is very violent, it seems like the gall is amazed.
And there is no additional pain in the chest of the body, and then the ribs are removed, and it is sore all over and does not go to the parts behind or below.
Therefore, for those who have joint pain, it is not necessary to be wrapped in iron, because the more you try to straighten it, the more it will contract.
The point that is in the head or on the front of the chest is not necessary. If the gout is small, then use that point with care and avoid that one if possible.
If it is large, you should suspend that part with your hand, and exfoliate it, and remove that; and adjust the plague to the suture, and care for that within what is healthy.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in
It appears to be written in a language similar to medieval Latin or an early form of Italian, Spanish, or French. However, I'm afraid I cannot provide a direct translation without knowing the specific context or the original language
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
The first source sentence translates to:
If the patient's leg is swollen and painful, keep a piece of iron on your body; then take a firm hold of the recent point, and stretch that part of the hand, the one that has been said; and massage that for two days.
Then adjust the stricture of the blood vessel; therefore, do not stop stretching the blood vessel as much as it can, until it is completely cut off and falls away from its own body.
If the leg is large, then in the scar there may be a cause of fear and pain, and most importantly in the stomach.
It is possible that you cut the skin of the leg, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And after treating it, when it is healed, remove it.
And keep in mind that you do not cut the leg that is of dark color, with little sensation, of the left leg, and that is affected by cancers.
And when you come back, remember this advice.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
The text you provided is in Latin and translates to: "A remarkable cure of the navel." Here's a breakdown:
Here's the translation: "The cure of the navel is caused by various motives; either by fissures of the caecum, which is located over the abdomen, and closes the intestine or hernia due to other ruptures; or by stricture caused by a vein or artery, as it is said, or by narrowing of the abscess in it.
When a fracture or tear occurs in the scapula, the color of the swelling resembles that of the chest; and the pain is felt from various situations. If it is for the exit of the intestine, consider the location of that which has been found, with less violent diversity, and as you approach that location, reveal; and then return; and much more is required of you, and the internal part must be well incised.
If it is due to humidity, the pain is felt and not concealed when you approach the patient's thigh, nor is it tightened, nor is it contracted.
And if it is for the sinus, consider these signs as evidence of gout.
If it is due to nothingness, the gout is heavy, thick, and hard, and remains stuck to a certain quantity.
If it is due to ventosity, touch the pain of the patient's intestine.
The operation in that part is to consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to sinus, or to vein, or to ventosity; you should know that it is forbidden for the cure of the patient, as there is fear and no one knows how to do it in the capital where I have described the gout by sinus and vein.
When the prominence of the umbilic is due to the intestine or abdomen, you should cover it with something that holds the abdomen in place and extends; and then make an incision in the circuit of the umbilic, and command what was inside to come out between your hands over the navel's two sides, and encircle around with a spatula on the umbilic's circuit over the location that you have sent it to with the intestine; and extend the width of the abdomen to the parts where the navel is large; and close or open and close the manicure of the belly button.
And if you extend the width of the abdomen over the belly button and introduce the said point in that indication to want the intestine; and if you have not atrophied or held by the belly button, then you should pull out and push the intestine to the parts where the navel is.
And if you have atrophied the abdomen, hold that part with your hand; and insert the excess of it.
If it is contrary to your arc or vein, surround that point with your hand and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong places and insert two needles in the circuit around the abdomen in the manicure of the crotch, which threads penetrate; and tighten the abdomen on four parts over the needles.
If you wish, remove the beads and clean the area where the extended flesh and tissue fall; or insert it when it is subtle and falls, and properly care for that part which is covered by the tissue as it becomes healthy again.
If the prominence of the navel is of flesh or moisture, you should cover that part with your hand as we have said, and if it causes pain or dryness, that which atrophies in it and covers the area, properly care for that part which is covered by the tissue as it becomes healthy again.
Chapter 33.
Of the treatment of a broken bone.
As we have said in the division, of the kind of bone fracture and in what manner it is treated by physicians, and that it should be considered in the treatment of the bone that the care of the physician does not cause ulceration; and as we have said, bone fractures are generated in the womb and the caution of the treatment of the bone.
And they cut the ancient ones that some fractures are in place where it is possible to eradicate them, as for the crack that is in the breasts or in the thigh and seem like the limbs allocated to scatter all of that, and mainly when beginning small.
When the disease is well-established and advanced, it does not belong to you alone, for I have never been able to cure this in anyone else, nor have I seen it happen to anyone else.
In the operation of this part, when it is allocated as we have said, it means that you precede and lay out the thighs and remove black blood from certain veins, and it is noted if it is significantly absorbed.
And prepare the thigh in the preparation required for the operation, and push into the groove those that cover it to that; and concave of the entire part of the codon so that it does not hurt when entering if there is no cause of the patient's pain. And lay out the bandage, and do not leave that part bare, and expose the wounds, and cleanse the wound as much as possible with your hand or with the instrument you have at your disposal.
If you have any objection to using a large bandage on the vein or artery, then cauterize that within which the flow of the bandage is stopped, and cure it in another way if it is healed.
Chapter 5.
Of hernia treatment.
We have recommended in the division of the species of hernia from the water, and the sentences of each species, for the cure of the patient by the doctors.
When that which is cured is of iron, it is not merely the specialty of alchemists alone, and is not approximated to the specialty of drummers or of hypochondriacs, but rather it is mortal.
When you have already treated this special case of hypochondriac drummer with medicine and it does not satisfy your medication, then you consider, whether if the thigh has already been made smooth or another another one, as if it is in the belly or stomach, and seems like to those, you guard that you do not give iron, because you fear this.
May is when you see the thigh of exuberant virtue, and it is not another thigh but a hypochondriac so only, and neither child nor old, then you guard the maneuver of the operation of the thigh as it raises it between your hands, and the minister expresses the stomach of it with its hand, pours water over this part after the pentenilh, and takes spines in this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp end like spades; however, it may have small brevity little by little, so that in the operation it does not enter into the intestine, and you read that.
When considering whether the generation of gout is from the intestines, it is observed that you have sliced through the umbilicus with three fingers in the amount of three times on either side, above the pubic bone.
If gout is caused by the patient's disuse of the foot, your cut should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three fingers.
If gout is caused by the meatus, your cut should be on the right side of the umbilicus.
It is not necessary that your cut be on the side of the abdomen that you want to lance for fear of causing excess bleeding in that location.
Then perforate the instrument throughout the codon, and enter it into that cut, and raise your hand from the codon to the siphac, and you expel that; and if the quantity of one unguent or more.
Then perforate the siphac wherever the saliva reaches that location, and it is the place of the water. E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma: "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This is similar to a fine silver canula; it is made of silver, gold, or lead, which has a small thorn at the tip and three thorns on either side: two from one part and one from the other part. It is then inscribed with the initials of the handwriting, as many times as possible:
E in the exit of the instrument is a ring, which is worn on the armor, and when the instrument pierces the water, you should apply pressure on the instrument, so that the water is evacuated in the same quantity, which if you do not cover in the hour, then the body may resolve the spirit animal or come to the five pieces that are approaching the death.
Mays evacuate of that second the quantity of the virtue of you and according to what means the dispositions of the virtue of the power of the will and the goodness of the will mean to you.
And take out the instrument, and release the water that causes it as much as possible, and hold it with the hand that is over the codena that holds the tool you are about to use on that second part of the hand.
And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and take out a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days to prevent errors from entering due to the water not being pure.
If you are afraid of the patient, and take out a large amount of water, cure that part in the sand, moisten it with water, and let it dry under the sun for a long time; and cure that part with desiccating medicines if it is healthy.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the mass fits properly with the extraction of water, according to what I have told you in water that precedes it.
Capitol.lv is a website that provides information about Latv
Of the care of the children who were born with the locations of the non-perforated urethra.
This sentence can be translated as: "Sometimes, a child's abdomen is swollen and the head of their mixture does not pierce (or is straight or not in its place).
Thus, a cautery is made by piercing through the skin so deep that it reaches the inside like a soft thread following this form:
And then, place a fine wire in the throat and tie it with that, and do this for three days or for fourteen days.
And when the urinary passage is blocked and inflamed, and then return it.
And if you do not tie the wire, it is possible that the urine will pass over this opening and not close this curtain.
Moreover, that which is tied in the throat with the wire of Plomb, as has been said, for several days until it is amplified.
Moreover, those in which the throat is not in its place, this causes it to be low, that which is born and cut is due to the tip of the hood because it cannot urinate in the parts below, when it raises the hood above the parts below; and this generation is not possible, because the sperm does not reach the higher straight path, and it is barren.
When the thigh is to be operated on, it should be placed over the patient's back, and the end of the horsehair of the same side should be pulled out with your left hand in a strong extraction, and insert the tip of the tail of the horsehair of the perpendicular part into the sore, as you would write with a pen, or if you do not know any part, so that it resembles the end of the tail and that it falls into the same place next to which it comes out.
And be careful that in your operation for the removal of a gallstone, four things may happen to you; and pause there at once and attend to the wound, and care for the inflammation within if it is cured.
Chapter 67.
Of the white that may happen in the perineum at the end of the tail of the penis and the scrotum, and the adhesion of the prepuce of the penis.
Things that happen to this white in the scrotum are seen with the eye and are made of flesh.
And of those one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
This appears to be a description of a medical procedure involving the use of a needle-like instrument to make incisions on the skin and then apply a substance to the wound. The text suggests that this procedure is being performed on a patient with a "no-maligna" condition, which may refer to a non-cancerous growth or lesion. The term "cov" is likely a misspelling of "covi," which means "cover" in Spanish. The phrase "suspenseas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota" can be translated as "suspend the needle and cut through that entrance that encircles the entire world." The term "eng
If the wound is malignant, of a dark color, then you should cover that incision with a piece of cloth and apply cauterization to the affected area. This suggests that the procedure being described is used to treat both non-cancerous and cancerous growths or lesions. The term "enguent" may refer to a substance used for cauterization, such as a hot iron or
If the wound is on the prepuce of the penis, and one part of the wound is cut into and the other part is left intact, then you should cover that wound with a piece of cloth and apply cauterization to the starting point until it is consolidated. You should also care for the remaining part of the prepuce, as it may not heal properly if not cared for correctly. This suggests that the procedure being described is used to treat both non-cancerous and cancerous growths or lesions on the prepuce of the penis. The term "trinquat" may refer to a condition where the wound does not heal properly, which could lead to further complications.
When one has already had children and grandchildren, and the old age has come, then it is clear that all that has been done before is denied and that it is being corrupted or corrupted; and it is proposed to put a line on that line, which is cut with flour of previous milled wheat and three thousand and ten times ground and crushed.
And care for that one by the other physician when it is healthy.
If there is no flow of blood, then administer cauterization with moon-shaped needles in this form:
Four cauterization methods are used to two different positions, one for the flow of blood and the other for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the wool is corroded and destroyed completely in one hour, you know that you should insert into the flesh of the prepuce a catheter of plastic for so that the urine passes through that.
In the attachment of the prepuce to the head of the wool (and this attachment does not happen except in that of the one whose prepuce is, and over it there is no circumcision; and when attachment happens by plague or by abscess) you know that you should exfoliate with a soft sputum when it is dissolved the liament and has been separated from the head of the wool in its entirety.
If it is difficult to determine those exquisitely, then you should know that you are excoriating some cause of the head of the foreskin and prepuce, and thus, when it is quite fine, it is easily pierced through its fineness by a needle.
And then separate the prepuce from the head of the foreskin by a thin layer of it, which is already moistened in the watery pus so that they do not adhere to another surface.
And then you should apply ointment if it is well-healed.
Capitol.lvii. (This appears to be a page number or
Of the worldly education of children and the treatment of this that happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not the solution to continuity of health as with other plagues: but rather it is our operation and will, and the doing of that in the children requires the better operation and the removal of lost pus for their health.
Therefore, say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all free men, who did not use it in their laws, and nor is it because they had acquired by experience that the cause is that you have ruined the majority of artisans and barbers who used circumcision and worldly education, and use false lies and untrue signs.
When I have already forbidden all these methods and did not improve the transformation of the patient, the transformation was such that the codon of the prepuce was hidden within four layers, the codon of the foreskin within two layers, and furthermore, the tonic was placed there, and then the pain was soothed. When the wound is cleaned with aloe vera, and it is digital, which is used by barbers, it is not securely sealed at the end of the male member, for it is often inserted in the wound.
In the operation, I often see iron and corrode your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and there are no visible movements in that manner that do not require disinfection, and you have seen that.
Less disinfection that I use for the forceps and the limbs, the quality, my experience describes to me, that the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is used is as the sharpness that is left; and thus if you prepare your hand with proportionate two sharpnesses, and insert it secondly after a compression in time; and there is compression of the limbs in the figure containing the umbilical cord of the whole part, which does not make an error of the whole.
The manner of the first operation is that you make the child major by making it larger if it is of those that I understand as small, which you do not do except that you read the foreskin on the penis only, and you see that he enters another day.
When you have achieved that pleasure in totality of that manier that is possible for you to receive your intelligence, then... And make that to be between your most statued hands, and not be seen as a disgrace; and hide the forfices in your mouth or further down the thigh, so that the child does not see those or use other of the instruments.
And place your mouth at the root of the penis and blow into the anus, and remove that which is inside the head of the penis, and modify that which is added to it due to impotence.
The form of the grippers in my creation, this is the form:
When some are external and the others are internal, so that it is not the same as the length of the lock, and the length of the dovetails is like the length of two manuscripts' pages.
When there is an error in world formation, it is often the case that one seeks to escape the innate code entirely, or to separate from it.
Therefore, it is important that you extend this to your own time and consider the apothecary's wares at the location and that they are equally divided.
And if you cannot have it with your own time, then take it from another and insert it there.
If it has been three days and the apothecary's wares are still not inflated, then you should enter there when it is ready for the apothecary to excrete that easement and insert the second one that is prepared for you.
And keep the head of the wares from being in that place.
And then cure this wares that the plague is condensed from the powders which have been recommended in the treatise of the powders.
And if it is inserted over the code according to measure and follows the divisions of these, then you will not notice it.
When it comes to treating that gout that they say has been cured within, it is said that...
Capitol .lviii. is not a complete sentence and does not provide
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
When there is a retention of urine in the bladder, it is caused by swelling or hardening of the kidneys or by inflammation or scarring, and appears similar to what has been said about the hands of those who have undergone medical treatment in division.
If not, it is said that the cause is very serious over the thigh, then you should cover the abdomen with an intravenous administration of the instrument called a syrinx, which is of silver and subtle lion, as follows: Of silver and subtle lion, with a long tail like the palm of your hand, at the end of which there is a subtle canal, like a palm tree, from which a subtle canal extends to the top.
When performing a urinal examination on the patient whose penis you grasp and whose urethra you expose for good drainage; and enter the extrusion of the foreskin into the area beyond the circumcision, and insert the forceps if there is any excessive hair from the foreskin, then introduce it into the canula with vehemence and thus close the circumcision with the border and the album of the wound.
And cover the patient's private parts with the sheet, and cleanse the vesicle of the patient and the surrounding area with soap and water.
And enter the circumcision as easily as possible into the opening of the urethra; and double the prepuce at its tip towards the glans; and pull the circumcision downwards towards that; and pull that downwards into the opening of the urethra, and the prepuce should be entered as far as the cause of the wound, and do not rush to follow this order unless it causes harm.
And extend the foreskin little by little until the urine seeps through the hair.
When it is necessary to remove the urinary bladder and use a catheter, do not stop until you have done so and then use a catheter inside until the bladder is empty and the uterus relaxes.
Capitol .lix. is not a complete sentence and does not
The catheterization of the bladder should be done with care and using appropriate instruments that are compatible with the patient's condition.
When an ulcer or aphthous lesion, or a burn is found in the bladder, or there is a coartate perforation, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clamped catheter, and this is the form of it:
However, if the removal of the bladder is closed, it is closed. And in that case there are three ways: two from one side, and how many times you need.
In the beginning it is located in the area where the catheter is inserted, and that is the one that is emptied, and the second quantity that is added, when any cause is removed from that drawn by the humidity, is ejected, and when it is expelled, it is expelled, and when it is expelled long, the one that clamps the catheter is the one that is heated with naptha in the battles of the sea.
When you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the moisture, and apply it to that part which is pushed into the parts of the bladder, so that the moisture is applied to the cavity of the bladder.
And insert the end of the catheter into the urethra according to what has been recommended in the ring; and apply the moisture to that part which is applied, so that this moisture penetrates into the bladder as much as possible, and the thigh centers around that.
The form of the cyst is such that the bladder is cysted, and this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make a point of silver or lead, of which the cap may seem like a small pen, and then the needle will be directed by the limb.
And grasp the bladder in motion, and stop at that moisture which you want to cyst in the bladder, and place it between two hands as far apart as possible, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystals into the groin.
And then stretch the vagina with your hand over the moisture that has entered the groin, as that moisture has already penetrated the vagina.
If you do not have a vagina, then take a glove and make a circle with your thumb; perforate that through the entire circumference; then insert the circle as far as it can go, and add more circles if necessary to hold the moisture, so that you can control the amount of moisture you want.
And then tie that in the instrument and make it as tight as you made it in the groin, and express that with your hand as much as possible before the moisture reaches the vagina.
Chapter 60.
Of the extraction of urinary stones.
In the division we have already spoken of the kinds of urinary stones and their treatment in medicine, and the difference between stones that are generated in the urethra and stones that are generated in the bladder, and their symptoms.
The text seems to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
When the stone is generated in the true vesica, it is that which is located in the vesica itself.
And you report this to that excellent example of manifestation and abbreviation.
Therefore, say that the stone generated in the true vesica directly affects the child; and of the doctors' sons it is that the urine that is expressed from the bladder seems to be water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the thighs cover their genitals, and moisten the pubic hair, and are dressed; and they cut off the anus in that way.
And it is said that the care of children who have reached fourteen years of age is easier than in the elderly. Less in the young is tolerated by heat than in the elderly.
And of that which the stone is more severe and the cure is less; and if it is fewer, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, how to reach the care of that, come at the beginning of that which the doctors call the church's remedy for the bladder, which extracts the entire fence that is in the patient's thighs; then that fence has some veins prohibited to the peyra, and you must do the investigation of that.
And if it is near the thighs and is soft and moist due to which the stone descends into the vesica or jumps from one place to another, then
Then place that cheese between your hands and the other's legs, so that the entire uterus is flat against the parts on the side.
When it is necessary to cut through that and the entire deformed part.
If you feel pain in the area, then cut as little as possible around it.
If the pain does not reach the entire foot, then cover the toe with oil if it is left intact, or cut it off if it is a child, or use the mentioned remedy if it is an adult, and insert it into the cavity of the foot. And if the stone has entered the toe when it was outside. And gradually convert that small part into the vaginal opening.
Then press on that with your thumb and expel it into the parts of the vagina that you have cut.
And command the midwife to press on the vagina with her hand; and command another midwife to extend the fingers of her left hand into the parts where you have cut, and hold the cord that is left in front of the location where the incision was made.
And insert the sponge that has been prepared for this, which is the form of it. And cut it into two parts, between the foot and the genitals, not in the middle, near the left thigh; and the incision should be on the stone and the toe that you have cut, and it should be a transverse incision, so that the incision is wide and does not become too tight after the amount of the stone that you have taken from the foot, and not too large, for if the stone in the foot presses on the penis, it will cause its damage.
You should know that there is one type of stone that has an angle and borders, for the treatment of which it is difficult to make a remedy by itself.
And from that water, it resembles a stone, and is round, and is used for the relief of pain.
So if it is the one with angles and borders, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not a remedy for pain, know that you must apply something over that, or gently press on it with your hand, the end of which should be like the one you press on the stone, and should not cause discomfort; or that you insert a subtle curved instrument at the end.
If you cannot apply it over that, you can amplify the tube a little, and if you see a flow of pus, decrease pressure on that by heating it with sulfur.
If the stone is less than one, you can at the beginning push it into the mouth of the cavity, and then insert it inside; and push a little water in; and seemingly make if your waves are fewer than before.
If a large stone is present, ignorance is that you have inserted that large section into the groin, for which one of the two causes may occur: whether it is dead or has turned into the continuous distillation of urine, therefore the place is not fully consolidated.
When there is an unnecessary expulsion of the child from the womb, or when the engine is in the fracture of the thighs and comes out through the holes, it should be stopped immediately.
Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and sanctuary of dragon's blood, and tighten that. And place olive oil or rose oil and vinegar on that cloth, or olive oil and red wine, to make the cauterization stick.
And place the thighs on the table, and do not slip the limb through the first day.
And when that has slid, wipe the place with vinegar and oil, and treat it daily and every other day with ointment, until it is healthy.
If in the wound cauterization is made, inflammation and cracking, and as if the sanctuary is in the frozen vagina, and for that they prohibit the use of the said ointment (and it is known by the discharge of urine), then enter that ointment into the wound and extract that sanctuary, so that it does not cause the vagina to corrode and putrefaction.
When the fever has been reduced by vomiting and purging, and it is suitable for the patient to be cured within the remedy, then...
And cover the entire course of the treatment during which you lie on your side and adjust the medications that have been placed over the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and it sticks to it, and urination is prohibited, then treat this as you have recommended so that you may reach sectioning, where many cases of this treatment have been accused of sectioning; and you have already done this, and this is the form of the perforator:
Of a triangular external incision, sharp, and fixed in place.
And pull the bladder away, and leave the stone behind in the bladder so that it does not return to the urethra.
And enter the iron into the bladder, with ease entering because of that perforator which comes to that stone. When you revolve the drill around your own leg in that small hole, and you drill through the drillhole of the other part to prevent it from entering another part, then the urine will be completely emptied.
And press your leg down on that which is swollen in the area behind the groin, where it is twisted, and is forgotten by the urine, and the thigh becomes healthy.
However, if this cure is not for you due to any reason that prohibits you from doing so, then place a suture on the drill hole and another suture on the other part of the drill. And close it over the drill hole in that groin between two gashes. And then extract it. And remove the ligament and modify the scarred part, which is made in the plague.
However, if there is no need for a ligament to close the drill hole, but rather to prevent it from returning to the cavity, and the other ligament is not, then when you unwind the suture from the drill hole, the knot returns to its place and drains the plague.
When it is necessary for you to have the patient lie down, that you raise the gown to the parts thereof, or that you return the usual complement, and take the plague away from there those who have said so.
I apologize, but the provided text "Capitol .lxi
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas" translates to "Extraction of urinary stones from the female genital
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada" translates to "Urinary stones in the female genitalia that are
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras" translates to "If you see urinary stones in any of those, the cure is difficult and forbidden by strong hands.
When the female has a strong pain, it is one of the symptoms that appear.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is wise enough to tell the doctor when she is in labor, or if it is one of the women who have given birth.
The third is that you do not know this art, especially the operation.
And the fourth is that the location of the section over the bladder in women is longer than the location of the bladder, so it indicates the need for a more extensive section, and there is fear.
If you are afraid that this will happen, then you should know that you take a wise woman, and it is not easy.
If you are not afraid of this, then you should know that you seek a wise woman, or present a wise woman who is experienced in the art, or a woman who is in this art and has partaken of it.
Therefore make the presentation and command the one who will do everything you ask, from the inquiry about the bladder to the beginning; which causes is that he looks if the woman is in pain, know that you put the end where you want in the crotch of him and that you want the bladder.
If that becomes worse, cauterize that part there, and command him to place himself on top of it.
If it is not seen, command the midwife to insert the part there into the cavity of the patient and place her hand on the left side of the vagina, and press that well.
If that becomes worse, you should gradually decrease the pressure on that part of the vaginal orifice as it moves away from the head of the penis until it reaches the corner of the thigh.
And place your hand on the corresponding part of the patient's abdomen wherever it is to be found and center the clitoris on that part, and he will not feel any pain from the cauterization done previously.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and place the ring on that section, and if you feel the clitoris, command to make the incision according to the amount that is known to be the size of the clitoris.
You know that the parts of the clitoris are different: four of those are small and large, hard and rough, long and rounded, and have no ramps.
There are several ways to interpret this sentence, but one possible meaning could be: "You know how many species there are for the patient that you want to apply the remedy on." A more literal translation could be: "You know the number of species there are for the
If you see blood flowing out, adjust the area where the gallstone was removed and stay there for about an hour until the gallstone is completely separated, and then return to your operation once the stone is outside.
When you prepare yourself with the necessary tools and say in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can help those in your operation.
If you see blood, and know that the expulsion of the stone is from the ureter that was incised, then place powder over the spot and stretch that am pulvils and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract that, for fear the patient dies. And cure the plague.
When the acuity of the stone is reduced to a manageable level and the area becomes wet, then return to your operation as soon as the stone is outside the body.
Capitol LXII.
Of sectioning over hernia accoza.
Hernia is not simply an addition of moisture in the white circle which we leave the coden of the generative containing the hoof, and is called the cipher.
And some veguadas are in the proper pannicol which is prepared naturally in the part of the hoof, if it is that another hoof; and is the coden of the generative between the white circle which has been said, and it is not allowed unless tart.
The generation of this hernia is due to inflammation, which occurs in the generative parts, as this material is enveloped there, and some occur due to striking a point on the generative parts.
This humor has different colors, whether it is the color of the red or bleeding, or black excrement, or white putrid matter, and it is said that it decreases.
The ways by which this addition of water is cleaned are as follows: if it is in the white circle that has been said, then you should apply the aposteme red and decline a little along the longitudinal axis as a figure of a hoove, and appear the generative part, where the humor counts that of all parts.
And if the humor is in the proper hoove, then you should apply the aposteme red and decline a little part of the hoove and some believe that there is another humor.
And if the humor is between the codon of the generative parts and the white circle, then you should remove the sentiment.
When you want to know the color of moisture, if it is necessary to expose the color of moisture in the posture that follows the cautery; then, after that, judge from the vestige of the cautery, as to what part it belongs to.
Then when you come to the treatment of the wounded arm, you should cover the wound with a cloth that is flax if it is possible, and sometimes the part of the cheek.
And if it is necessary to lie down on the back over any cause for a short time, and stop the movement of the limbs.
And if you lie on the left side of the patient, and order the minister to stand on the right side, who extends his arm from the hip to the two sides of the shoulders and the parting of the navel to the chest.
And if you take some water and divide the ribs of the lower part of the patient's back by the length within a few inches of the navel.
And if the cut is correct if it is distant from the line that should be the belly of the ribs, within which the white flesh of the chest comes to the finger.
When you exfoliate, observe, and keep your hand steady so that you do not injure yourself; and your exfoliation should be with the part of the body that you are exfoliating, which is suspended by the hair and scrutinized according to the quantity you can possibly handle.
Then make a small hole in the container of water and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the section of the intestine and extend the container to its parts; and do not touch the cord with the fingers that comprehend the genitals, and insert the container into the hand that you can possibly manage. Then insert it into the body either vaginally or anally, and mainly the secretion that is subtle, because if you do not scrutinize the insertion of the container very carefully, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
If the intestine is processed in the area of the patient's genitals during the operation, when you have completed the section of the container, return it to its place, and adjust the lips of the cord of the genitals according to the suture, and care for that water as the others do, if it is healthy.
If the man's heart is corrupted by another malady, you should cover the veins that are causing the pain and remove the heart, and then care for it as they have said.
If the wound is divided into many parts, you should know that these are hernias; therefore, insert it in the next place where you have made the incision; and if you see that it is an operation, you do it.
And then you remove the scar, and enter the submerged layers of wool that are immersed in oil or rose oil; and put another layer of wool that you have submerged in oil and rose oil, and expand it over two gallons and the mirror of the belly; and put away doubled folds and powders, and tie them with the ones that follow this form:
And then you tie the two ends and the folds of the wool that are covered with carmine according to this resemblance; and they are points at the ends where they are pressed by the horn or dry hair, and they are added to the structure in the belt of the belts, and one of the ends presses the buttock inside the two, and the other end presses the pantile's point, and two extractions over two thighs and two extractions on the other hooks, and all the narrowing is adjusted in the belt of the belts.
If some of these hernias are medicated artificially with cauterization instead of sectioning with a sharp knife; and that you take a subtle cautery and insert it into the codena of the gintils, and then ignite according to what has been recommended if the white cipher containing water is discovered, and you then take cauterization in this manner: It seems like there is a Greek letter involved in the text, but without the specific context or the entire text,
and then you burn that cipher, and it is ignited when all the humidity is outside the container.
and then extend the cipher by one unit, and scrape it, and scrape the subtle cautery that is lit; and insert it next to you as far as you can when you have eradicated all of it; and keep this fire away from you as much as possible.
And you know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than an incision operation.
However, if you oppose cauterization at the time of sectioning or at the time of cauterization or injection, you should know that this contradiction is for your own good, and you should cure the one that causes it according to what is suitable for you.
When the patient's thigh is painful and fears the second operation due to its horror, you should administer the second dose according to what I recommend; and when you are sure that you understand, for the sake of the meanings given, that this hernia is incurable.
You should cover the thigh with a cushion raised above the ground, make a perforation in the middle of the lower part of the abdomen, and stop the perforation after the length of the course.
And if the wound is wide, it will completely cure the inflammation.
Then place a bandage over the wound and hold it in place with something, so that the inflammation does not spread. And cure that after the plague is healed.
When the pain is contrary to the egg of the inflammation at that time, and it is not done only because the white pannicule in the orifice of the plague causes contraction and prohibits the excretion of urine, you should cover the plague with a pen or instrument of the kind from which the urine is extracted from the bladder, the form of which is preceding; or adjust in the urine's oppression a small.
You should know that the urine returns, and it is excreted after about three months or less; and when it is added, you should be perforated second by that same hand, for the patient to pass the days in bed.
Capitol, LXIII.
Section on the treatment of hernia and its cure.
You should know that in this section there is fear of pernicious effects in the larger parts; because I have seen the release of it and its preservation for the better.
And you should remember the operation in that and the specifics of the stitches.
Therefore, say that the stitches are made on the chest of those whose breasts have been constricted and are caused by sudden acute inflammation, which is caused by the accumulation of blood in the breasts, or by a blow.
And the color of the stitch is according to the color of the chest, and it does not cause any pain in that area, and it is a heavy stitch.
And the stitch is very tight, of which the color is dark, and it does not cause any sensation in that area.
When some swellings are caused by constriction of the arteries, and by inflammation of those parts that have already been felt as painful, or by inflammation of the veins.
It is known that inflammation of the arteries is caused by the distribution of the pulse when you press on that part with your thumb; and it does not matter if it touches.
It is not that which is caused by inflammation of the veins is dispersed by any cause from the pressure on that part;
And it is possible that on this special occasion there is a section over the other parts and under the chest; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and extend the head to the parts thereof, and extract that from the white, and cut the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and inscribe the suspensors that you extract from that whole part of the parts of the head;
If the head is already fixed on those solidified parts, then you must know that you extract the head and insert it there;
If adhesion occurs between any cause of the gallbladder, or within that which is between the belts, you must cover that entire adhesion with your hands and insert it into that through an round incision.
If the cause of the adhesion is from flesh in the place where it is behind, you must cover that entire cause with your hands and remove all of what is of it, as they have said.
When your operation is completed, you must fill the wound with lint soaked in red oil and vinegar, and apply that to the other care taken within that which is cured.
Capitulum LXIV.
Of the cure of hernia that is from a wound.
A postulate is wrapped around by some wrapping that resembles a cord of softening of the testicles, and it becomes difficult to make movements and walk over the thighs.
And in the cure of this affliction, there is fear for what precedes the remembering.
However, cover that you say operation in that second which was done in the first.
It says that it is necessary to cover the vulva with a high pillow; and raise the suspensory of the testicles to the parts where it ends; and tie the codpiece of the genitals to the thighs that you can see on the belly; and hold the other ministers that you, and extend them with force.
And then insert the sharp needle through the skin in the middle of the thigh, after the veins are discovered.
And then scrape off all parts that you have said in the extraction of the arrowhead, which are in the templates.
And then place an awl in which the double point is true, and fasten it at the first of the places where the wounds occur, and fasten another one at the back of them. And then insert those in the middle of the long part of the thigh, after the long parts of the thigh are cut, and extract that which is added with the wet and corrupted humors.
And cure the plague by curing the other plagues in which you want to be born by means of which the thighs do not yield to one of two testicles, and that is not bad for this.
If one is affected by all the symptoms, then you should know that either the testicles are prolapsed or the testicles for this reason are placed in the bladder, because it is devoid of all nourishment due to the incision of the bladder, and it is fixed, or it is placed there so that it is not well-suited to those.
Capitol Chapter LXV.
About the treatment of inguinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the anus of the right side of the abdomen, which causes the intestines to be pulled out through that rent in the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the cipher or of excitement of the intestines, and it happens due to these specific causes: striking, pushing, pulling, lifting a heavy object, or seeming.
And the symptom of this, when it occurs due to the extension of the cipher, is that it happens gradually over time and not suddenly, and it causes the tongue to apostema into the throat when the cipher compresses the intestine.
When the symptom of the gallbladder is felt in the abdomen, and at the beginning it causes severe pain suddenly; and afterwards, various apparent symptoms appear from the region of the spine, and this is due to the intestine, and it affects the parts affected by the gallbladder.
And some parts of the intestine are forgotten by the gallbladder, and this hernia is called an inguinal hernia.
And some parts are formed by inflammation, and some parts are found in the gallbladder, and here they are held back, and there is great pain and more severe pain when it is pressed, and some parts cause worsening and more pain.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this disease, fear is had, because it is feared that the caustic will be avoided in that place.
And the mandible of the operation of this one is that you command the abdomen to reduce the intestine to its place in the parts affected by the cavity, and place it over the patient's collar between their legs, and raise the changes of the patient.
And if you want to cut the rib that is cutting the testicles in half, and insert the testicle completely through the hole; and then fix it in place with sutures of the same length as those that were used to close the incision for those.
And if the hole is smaller than the quantity that you can possibly make it, then it will be forgotten.
And if you remove those knots that are in the testicles, and then find the white, hard knot of each part.
Then you should enter the said thing in such a way that it goes into the testicle, in such a way that it is between the white knot and the codon of the hole, and then between the white knot next to it, and release the adherence that is in the part behind the hole.
And if you want to cut the rib that is cutting the testicles in half, and then extend the white knot on both sides, and raise the testicle with the codon to the hole's part; and command the minister to extend the testicle and dissolve the adherence that is behind the filled solution.
When asked if there is any cause for the intestine being wrapped around the white, hard bone, it is said that there is none. If you suspect that the white bone has any cause, then press on that with your hand to the left.
And you should insert into the side of the end of the testicle's tail, where the sac and the cord run, as they have advised in order to prevent it.
And apply wool dipped in oil and rest on the thigh; and apply the ligament that they have advised (and some white veins are burned, which they say about the incision of the testicle's flow, four veins fall into those) and tighten the ligament so that it does not slip.
If the pain of the testicle is delayed, apply cold water to the tail and rest over it so that it does not fall.
And care for the thigh with another cure of the wounds within which it is healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of a ventral hernia.
In this hernia there is not seen what has been done with the patient's thigh during the cure of it.
And the first things that were done with it as they have advised in the hernia which they have made; the which is that you lie the wounds over the incision on the side of the patient's difficulty, and dry in the middle of the abscess which I ordered to this, within which the veins may fall.
When the plague has been treated according to what has been said, and it is known that it is healed, then... (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
This appears to be a citation or reference, specifically to chapter 67 of a
When the disproportion that is found in the ankles, then... (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
Some have seen that the ankles rupture in this way, and they have removed the location... (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
And do not blame the generals for any cause of the intestines in the generals; and if they do, it is rare; and return to its place in all hours. (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
If the time is prolonged as well, a slit is made in the gallbladder when it is desired to place the intestine in the gallbladder; and this happens due to the extension of the gallbladder which is in the ankle as has been said, which causes the gallbladder to extend, and it becomes softened and the location from which it was extracted is removed. (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
And the treatment of it is by cauterization as has been said before in the story of it. (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
When some wounds are treated with iron according to this method: and that the thigh is placed on the patient's back, and the area of the rupture of the emerging nails is cleaned, it is found that the temperature of the skin has risen by three degrees.
And apply pressure to the white spot that is inside where it has been discovered.
Then grasp the ring and place it over the prominent part of the white spot, and press it on the abdomen.
Then grasp the other end of the white spot and adjust it to the end of the ring, adjusting both of them.
Then remove the end of the ring and do not cut off the white spot completely, nor extend the hole, nor cause any other cause as you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And treat that as in the treatment of diseases, and when you cut off the fields, cleanse and restore the disease inside that has been solidified; the white spot contracts and is not adjusted to the prominent part of rupture.
Cauterization is better in this place, where it is pushed for health.
Chapter 88.
Of the softening of the testicle cord.
Watched motions of the testicle cord in healthy men are softened by heat where the flesh that is between those is softened, and the appearance of the region is improved.
When it is necessary to examine the patient's thigh in the course of their treatment for the disease that caused the wound on the leg according to the doctor's order, and to cover the entire wound with the bandage that has been softened over the natural skin; and to adjust the lips to the suture.
And if you want, in the beginning, the excess of the softened bandage is divided into three or four parts and is fixed with a suture.
Then insert between the sutures; and after the cure of the other diseases that come when it is healthy and the wounds are healed,
Capitulum .lxxix.
Chapter on Castration.
You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, and it is not necessary to remind you of this in this book; but only one or two hands are needed for the memory of the physician when he is entombed in that, which knows the cure of the animal that caused the castration; and the other hand is to drive us to have castration of other animals for our benefit, such as by motions, and mouths, and jaws, and pigs, and appearance of the animals.
I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting, or by making a slit.
In the case of castration done by cutting, the way of the operation is to cut the animal's tail, entering it between those parts that are soft and flat, and hanging down. And hold those parts in your hand, entering them if they are flexible and not seen outside the touch.
In the case of castration done by cutting and slicing, you will have the animal and press the noose of the testicles of the other side on the male.
And tie the strings, and insert them over each leg of a cut made between two legs that have been processed.
And insert those parts that will have exfoliated. And do not put anything on those of the cipher above, except the subtle cipher that is over the veins.
This way of castration is better than the one done by cutting, because when cutting it causes a strong effect on the testicles so that the animal does not want to fight.
And after the wound is healed, pay attention to it to see if it has become infected.
The first line of the text is "Capitol .lxx." which
The second line of the text is "De la cura de hermafrodozia." which translates to "Of
The third line of the text is "Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels." which translates to "In men, Hermaphrodisia is the second treatment: one or both of the man's genitals may appear as if they have an opening, between the two testicles, there appears a female's vagina in which the male's penis is placed.
When certain urinary pearls are found in the scrotum of that male.
In females, there is a specific: and it is that the female's belly is situated over the penis as if two testicles of a man were present, and as the pubic hair of a man.
The treatment is of three kinds: of two males and one kind of the female. And it is that you are knowledgeable about those adjusted cuts and when the disease of that disappears, and that you cure the other diseases with that treatment.
And in the second kind of men, where urine is found that is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Chapter 21.
Of the leg and the wound caused by female causes.
A severe leg is often adjusted according to natural causes when it is erected and the leg is observed; and some pearls are magnified in some females as if they were spread like in men and through the act of coition.
The first line of the text is not in the same style as the previous lines, it seems to be a separate sentence or a different part of the treatise. However, I will try to translate it based on the context and the language used:
When the wound is not finally healed, mainly at the root of the finger, because it does not allow the flow of pus.
Then apply this cure to the wound that is healed.
The flesh that is inside the leg is flesh that is inside the leg, and it is easily torn apart into parts similar to a coat (and for this reason they were called "buttock wounds" in the past); therefore, we should cut it as slowly as possible, and cure the part that is healed.
Capstone 72.
Of the treatment of gout.
Gout is that the man's leg does not have a hole, or if it has a small one. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is because of the disease that has preceded it, and that is either due to hardened flesh or a subtle cipher or a sharp edge.
And it is either on the root of the finger, or on the sides of the toe, or on the sharp edge of the pus, or on the base of the pus, and it forbids cutting and twisting and stretching, and it forbids menstruation.
When the knowledge of that is to be gained by looking at the pulse, if the apprehension is apparent, proceed; but if not, then closely examine those things or the rays.
But if the apprehension is not apparent, then carefully examine those things or the rays, and cut and disrupt that.
And if you place your hand over the cheeks, and pause the tongue on those indications of blood that are most recent.
And if the woman is on her side, and the thighs are extended, and you extend the cheeks as far as that subtle one is broken and the apprehension is relieved.
And if you take and bind it with string and press it on that place, and leave it there for the day that that place is not yet solidified.
But if the apprehension is large and spacy, then cover that with something that you have not yet inscribed on that, either with lava or with myrrh.
But if the apprehension is by flesh, then suspend that there and inscribe that.
When you have given the patient the medicine that stops the flow of his stomach's pain, it is necessary to give him something to eat and drink, and to rest, and to apply ointment to the wound.
And provide a wide-mouthed tube for the plague not to be consolidated yet.
Hold it for the Alcus Jorn's sake and administer cold saliva.
And be cured by the other cure of consolidation when it is healed.
And some things happen in the main country of other animals, and it is necessary to follow this manner. If it is for acephaly, the acephaly which is in the head should not be made with contrary force in this manner.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of red blood that happens in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated of the openings of the veins that are more than those that are continuously inflamed, and because they are old and are made with contrary force in this manner.
I have already said in the division the specifics of those and the symptoms of those, and I direct you to those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Then say that hemorrhages and pains occur when the blood flows into the larger veins and do not appear to be in need of treatment. In those cases, there is no need for treatment.
Among these are those that are on the large veins over which they feel pain, and those that have been cured.
And cover that you place the female on a hot cloth and extend it as far as possible, either over the fingers or over the skin, and insert it into those who have pain.
And powder over those with the excesses of the saliva from one of the insoluble powders, which are similar to those and seem to be those.
And rub the feet for an hour, and then place it in warm water.
If the excesses of the saliva persist, then make that serum in decoction of sumat, coriander, and other similar substances.
When preparing for the first application, take fine flour and comfortable clothing, and mix it with honey to make a plaster that is comfortable on the back of the patient.
If the wound separates, it is; and if not, attach it with two nails, and scrape off the hardened matter from the edges.
Take wool and dip it in the fat of a calf, or the fat of a lamb, or the fat of a goat, and apply it to the wound; and afterward care for the wound so that it heals inside.
And care for the wound so that it heals.
Capitulum .lxxiv.
Of the perforation of the uterus, an accident happens in pregnancy.
Specific types of apostemes occur in pregnancy, such as cramping and aposteme lapident, ulcers and sores, adhibition and eruptive and herpetic and hemorrhagic and rash and thil and other apostemes. When I have already spoken of these diseases and their symptoms, and the remedies for them in division,
When you inquire about this matter of gout in the chapter of apostema, which is the most common among the apostemas that are colleged, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of the same is performed with iron, then proceed as follows:
Then consider if the pain of the apostema in the head at its beginning is sharp and due to percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it constricts and if over that sensation, if not for perforation of the same, and cure that apostema as soon as the acuitat of the accidents ceases.
Then if you consider that you make the female on a bed which has several pillows; and lean over the head and adjust the headrests on the part where the venter is, and the thighs are expanded, and pause the headrests near the thighs, and lie down comfortably for this purpose.
And the midwife follows the right side and administers the instrument which is used to open the most, the form of which will be in those causes that they do to follow.
When you wish to administer this instrument that you have made for the female's vagina, and it is important that the instrument does not enter more than the opening of the vagina and the lower part of the thigh. If the instrument is larger than the previous one, then you should cover that with powder on the texture of the previous one so that nothing else can enter the previous one.
When you have placed the string that is running through the instrument of the latch and have held it, the minister will rotate the string as soon as the orifice of the larger one has been opened.
When the inflammation appears, and it is touched with the hand and the thumb, you must know that this is the head of the latch that has been swept clean.
When the sore is evacuated, you must know that you should place in the plague a submerged machine of olive oil or red olive oil in which there is at least one stiptisitat; and place the calce in the section in the preon of the larger one.
And place the deformed thigh and over the damped wool that is submerged in water in which there are built badges.
And it will be cured in about two days when the doctor has found out what is appropriate to be given to you to become healthy.
And some of the wounds are washed with water and the plague is made to drink water that is mixed with honey and mead, and in the water in which it is built, whether it is made from lilies or long-term aromatic herbs, it returns to the doctor.
If the plague is caused by the more severe type, you should cover that part of the body with the doctor's cloak, and have them treat that part of the body with the remedies they have mentioned in the division.
Capital LXXV.
Teach the midwives how to handle the waters that are useful for the women's doctors when they come to the second, unnatural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural child per halls of it, and because when you see the woman express her parts and desire to smell the air, and over there is cut because over it is the part, and quickly the amniotic fluid is the second figure natural, and the umbilicus or suspended or hung from the navel.
So when you see those parts, you should cover that the belly of the woman is covered so that the fetus lightly descends when it is over the head of the child, descends to the second part, and is washed with those excess parts for good washing.
When a part of the body that is not natural and not usable becomes inflamed, and when the fetus is lying on your feet and the part of the body is facing the head of the foot, and the leg is one, or at the knee, or the head of the foot and the leg, or at the abdomen of the foot, and then it is converted over the shoulder, and resembles the figures of the unnatural parts.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and disappointment.
And you are showing the whole figure of those, and which engine is used in those to be significant for this and to be over this.
When the point is placed on the natural hair of the head and that is very strong on the woman and is made in the difficult part and sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then do that seizure or let her hold it, or let her hold the hair of the man and evaporate the fenugreek and the olive oil.
When the midwife inserts the placenta between the patient's thighs, or if it is necessary to do so inside the vagina, or if that is the case due to the swelling that occurs in that part of the body due to moisture. And press the woman's abdomen inside where the fetus is coming out.
If it does not come out, it is possible that the woman's cervix is filled with pillar and fig gum, and other things.
And order the midwife to open the cervix and push gently; and put your mouth on the woman's and she will push for an hour, until the fetus comes out completely.
And if the woman does not deliver the fetus at the beginning, it is possible that you need to reduce those little by little in difficulty. If the woman does not obey the command, put the woman on a pillow and lift her legs up, and place the pillow on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the convulsion.
If the hands are not formed and do not fit, then you should insert them into those and remove the fat from the foot or tie it to the waist of the patient's clothing and remove that equalization, so that it will not be forgotten.
When the joint is above the feet, you should cover that which presses on them, and convert the small foot, and convert the little hand, and convert the nail of the finger and extend those small parts one by one.
How much is it that you enter between the thighs, you command that he expresses himself, and make him extend his hand, and if he forgets to do so, then God will help.
And if he does not forget, as I have commanded, you return the small part by part to its place where you placed it when you paused that second natural figure, and then he will forget the first suffering.
And if it is prohibited as I have commanded, you take a piece of linen and gum dissolved, and apply it all over the mortar with good percussion, and line up all that you have according to what I have commanded, and place the female's part below the belly of him. And make that ceze in water beef, when you have achieved the hypochondria.
When sometimes the parts of the patient have become softened, then do it under mirth and under pause to that. And when the sub-fumigacio lasts for an hour, then you should place a cezala on it, and make it turn and extend the mouth of the patient, and take from there, and press the part that is lower on the abdomen of the patient with a gentle compression, so that the following part does not get forgotten.
Observation of the small intestine lying on one of the patient's thighs. Your task is to reduce the hernia of the patient, if you cannot do it, raise the woman and make that one come out.
And if it does not come out, place the pillow on the bed, press the thighs of the patient with strong impact, and apply ointments to those parts that you recommend using with mucilages.
And if the pain comes, place the poultice on the belly, study about reducing the hernia, swallow the small piece second in nature, and make her vomit and command her to understand that she is fully inserted.
Observation of the small intestine lying on the left side of the patient's thigh, with the mass of the patient expanded and the belly of the patient on the right side of the patient's thigh. It is necessary that the midwife holds the hernia of the small intestine and rotates it piece by piece, and that it is easy to do.
When it comes to when one is about to vomit, and you pause over the patient's throat where they have been told to apply oil and mucilage.
And if you command that he takes small sips, and when he has vomited, you place a cup under one arm and command him to lean it against the wall, and then command him to close it; and make it vomit again with condizine. The exit of the fetus is prepared on the side.
When the woman is about to give birth for the second time after this labor, consider, and you should insert your finger into the vagina as soon as it is dry from being evacuated from the humidity.
And if the fetus is hung over the face and neck of the woman, you should insert your finger into the belly button, so that it does not get stuck and suffocate.
And press the fetus between the parts of the teeth as soon as you remove that second one that was in, and command the woman to breathe if she feels any dizziness, and the air will be expelled outside, if God or the wind wills.
Exit means "exit" or "emerge". The word "geminorum" is a genitive form of "gign The text is discussing the causes of multiple births, specifically triplets or quads. It suggests that these are not common and can be unexpected, but they are not the only cause. The text then implies that there may be natural causes other than those already known.
Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
If these symptoms are difficult to determine, then consult the natural figures that have been described and treat them as follows:
If the matron has joint pain that is caused by gout, which brings ease and subtlety, and delays, and is skilled in following the entire figure of the physician who prepares for her to be cured.
Remembering this that is formed from the matrix by embryos and are destroyed.
Some are formed in the larger ones, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and eight, and ten, and you must now verify that a woman aborts at the fifth, and another at the tenth, which causes pain due to the measurement of the divine saws.
And thus it is said that in the science of the woman there is often a case where she appears to be pregnant and then aborts, and therefore she stops doing that.
Chapter 76.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus, it is said in the division of medicine that it does not cause any harm, and you should use caution, as you consider if the woman is of good virtue and not of those accidents by which she suffers loss.
When the woman is lying on her back with her head inclined towards the edge and her buttocks raised, it is necessary to...
The physician should hold those parts or place them on the bed so that...
And moisten the mouth of the older woman with...
And apply the ointment to the midwife with...
And suitable places for application: then consider if the foot is prepared to be placed on the head, and you should keep your fingers in the crevices of the toe, or in the collar, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or on the chin, or in the shoulder of the patient, or in the axillary regions of the shoulders, or in the armpits.
If the prescription is for the feet, you should apply it to the toes or the back of the shoulders.
If you hold the patient's arm, and stop the curvature of it in that place where the opposite elbow of the left side is located, and enter the hand easily and keep the elbow in the same places that have been mentioned, entering when the cause becomes apparent.
Then pause and keep the other hand in the appropriate position, or the third one if necessary, so that it is not extended too far, and does not extend beyond its own rightness.
Make sure to cover the entire part, so that the application of the eye is made as it is in tooth removal for the eradication of it.
And if you cover that which is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, make sure to cover the mother with your hand on those parts that are mentioned and turn them over to those that are held.
If the part of the foot is forgotten, make sure the points are moved to the place where it has been placed; and do so until all the foot is forgotten.
When the woman's thigh is swollen and it is not possible to reduce it by means of compression, then you should cover that part with a cloth; and take out that which is outside and insert it either in the joint of the thigh or in the groin.
And if you cover that part with a cloth on the other thigh and both feet.
When the head of the fist is large, or if it causes pain in the compression, or if the mouth of the water jug is adjusted, then you should insert your finger between the sharp spikes and cut off the mouth of the jug, or take out that which is inside with an instrument called "alundat," which is the form of the other instruments in the capital, this.
And similarly if the fist is large by nature: and you should cover that with a cloth, or take it in your hand as they have said; and take out those bones from the forceps.
And if the head is swollen and it is compressed, then you should cut inside so that the humidity which is in the chest is dispersed.
If it is not complicated, and there is no obesity, you should insert the needle as far as possible at the location where it can be inserted most easily for you.
If the end of the stomach is blocked or in the hernia, you should cover that opening where the moisture that is inside passes through.
If the stool is on the thighs, you should attract the feces with your hand and lead it to the mouth of the patient.
If the abdomen and chest are hard, you should cover that opening with something that will not compress the belly and exit through your mouth, and let the abdomen and chest open so that the moisture inside can pass through.
If the other members are still there and you return the needle to your mouth, insert it into the left side of the mouth; if the patient's mouth is blocked, insert it into the left side of the mouth, and draw out the needle through the left side of the mouth, and insert it into the patient's mouth with one or two needles, and pull it out with those.
If the mouth of the patient is cut by scrofula, which happens to the face, then you should cover it with something that does not cause pain on the face; instead, cover it with something that can administer a drizzle of wet oils. And apply plasters; and follow the patient in ointments that soften and moisturize.
If the gout is on the sole of the foot, then you should if possible apply an ointment that is an ague: and apply that which they have said in the foot.
And if it is not possible to apply an ointment, then you should be inserted in pessaries, and be extracted.
And make sure that no other cause distracts from the second part.
And when you have completed all of your operation, apply that which they have said about the cure in the scrofula that happens to the face.
And if phlegm flows from the sinus, then apply ointments with warm oils and administer another cure.
And you have already seen a woman in the belly of which was a gout, and placed over that focus another taken by hand, and that focus dead is the other. It happens to some people at a certain time that they have an attack of gout in the sole of the foot; and it begins to swell as soon as it is touched, and then begins to become red and hot.
And you were called for the treatment of it, and treated it for a long time, and the inflammation was not subsided.
Then you examined it for some causes, applied a strong ointment to it, and examined the bone, and passed your hand over it for a long time, and examined another bone; and you were too surprised to see that there was no bone in the stomach.
And then you thought they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
So you examined the inflammation, extracted the bones from it, the female existing in the sole of the foot, and had been used for a long time in this way, corrected by a small piece of gut.
And you did not think it strange, but rather knew that this is what is known and helps in this that the artificial joint is made by the hand for the care of the patient.
From among the forms of instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Form of ventilation used in which the larger part is opened:
This is the form of strangling in which the free ends are engulfed, in which engulfment has two benefits at the two extremities of two fetuses: However, this advantage may be difficult to understand, and it may be made of silk, or of iron, or of bronze of boys:
And if the latitude of each fist is twice that of the two thumbs and the margin of each is one thumb, and the length of each is a palm and a little more, and the longitude of each is twice that of the two thumbs or a little more, then in the middle of two fists, the adjustments of those two are made, of which the longitude is a palm and a few more, and the latitude is twice that of the two thumbs or a little more.
And these two additions are intermeshed in the mouth of the larger part so that it can be opened when you turn the prescribed virtues:
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera: This sentence is quite complex and seems to be discussing the appearance of something that resembles a subtle or
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps. This sentence can be translated as: "It is a sign of gout, either from the big toe or the little toe, according to the re Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so deux additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz. This sentence can be translated as: "However, in the extremity of the two added parts, and the length of those added parts is twice as long as a palm, and the latitude of those parts is two thumbs.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu. This sentence can be translated as: "And when you want to open it wider, do you make the female over the leg of the foot pendulating, opening that which is between the thighs of the leg. E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols. This sentence can be translated as: "And when you open it, do you use the instrument as if it were a forceps according to the quantity you want of the opening of the mouth of the wound that fits the one you want.
The form of which they described in ancient times:
The form of driving out the wind that drives out the foot:
The form of sweetening the heart that is told in the great head:
And it is assembled with forceps that the teeth are in the extremity, as many times as there are, and some are made longer as many times as forceps follow this form, as many times, at the quality of teeth that are fixed and told. The form of sweetening little:
The form of an unc having a spine:
The form of an unc having two spines:
The form of saliva having two ends at the quality of the foot's cap is cut off:
The form of two spatulas made:
All of these instruments are exercised, and when you multiply the species of this and prepare them for the artificer, as it is placed in its operation and place, and it is given to the men according to their quantity.
When you have already finished using those instruments, you must immediately remove them, as the need for these is not justifiable.
From the extraction of the second one.
When the second one is held, you must hold it with the child's hand that holds the part to be held, and apply pressure on the affected area with your hand on the mouth of the patient and over their nails, and if necessary, squeeze it.
And if so, you must take a glove and pierce the covering with a nail and hold it on the lips of the older one, as it is like honey and rum and anet and camamilla and arabic cassia and santaurea. All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the glove, and hold it over the fire.
And place a corn of coconut in the mouth of the older one, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concave part of the mouth.
And make it as it has been said, and the second one will be removed quickly.
When the patient is unconscious and not responsive, you should command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or almond milk, and then enter the vagina and search for the second child, and when that one is found, extend the first hand a little at a time, as they have recommended, and when you find the second one, carefully extract it a little by little, rectally, so that the mother does not feel any pain. It is easier to move the head in the right and left directions.
And if the mother's mouth is stretched, we have already recommended the cure for strangulation and medication of the womb.
But if you do not forget all the causes that they have recommended, keep in mind that what is inside the woman's mouth lies in the man's hand, and apply cisterns and terafarmacons; that will cause that to be absorbed by that part within a few days and it will be dissolved and forgotten.
When it is necessary to vomit, it is the high-pitched sound of the mouth and stomach that is heard, and then the belly is relieved; and at that time, sub-fumiguacios are administered and are convenient for this.
Many of the ancients used sub-fumigations of niter and dried figs.
Form of the instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated, the retention of menstrual blood and the second child must be prevented.
It may be for seeing or for hearing.
And the end of the small one is placed in the chimney and the end of the large one over the fire, and the sub-fumigations are placed over the fire's breeze.
And hold onto that entrance until the sub-fumigations have been consumed and another is made.
For the cure of the child's non-penetrating anus.
If children do not have and their buttocks do not penetrate, which are already small and thin. When the midwife comes to the woman who is in labor and says that she is in pain, and if not, then pierce her with the needle, and make sure you do not touch the scarlet snake.
Then place your hand over that thin cloth on the face and care for that part inside which is sensitive.
If you fear that it may be thin, then stop in the bathroom for a few days, and take it when the child wants to poop.
And if you have thinning of the buttocks for the consolidation of plague or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is firmly fixed, and take care of it as we have said in the treatment and the dressing.
For the treatment of fistulas that come out.
The fistulas that come out in the part where you leave pus are lower in nodacity and larger, those that come out from the buttocks or in the space of one part.
And is a fistula or mouths.
And when that nodacity is old and comes from the moisture of the white or subtle humidity, and some are seen in these fistulas some penetrants.
When these penetrating humors are expelled through the urine and excretions; and some women use the remedy of expulsion, and it is most effective for those worms.
And some of those fistulas are visible in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the urethra; and some are visible in the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
And why this penetrating fistula is found in the buttock and non-penetrating is that you insert the thin thread into the buttock, and try to gently touch or hammer on the fistula when it is not turbulent.
If there is turbulence in that area, then try to gently touch or hammer on the fistula when you feel the thread or the horsehair in the thin thread.
And if you do not feel that fistula at all or do not proceed with any cause of evacuation, know that it is non-penetrating, and lay the patient on the couch for treatment.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the thigh, its meaning is the excretion of urine from that place and the prohibition of that place being used in medicine for further treatment.
When something penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and envelope of pain in the circuit, it is necessary to go inside if there is no resistance in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that it will not be closed at any time; and that it does not work in that medication, nor is consolidated as expected.
And in all those fistulas that do not reach the cure of all, and the cure of those is worked by the hands of the skilled surgeons over which it is placed.
And in that which is not penetrated and not old, the cure of iron is hoped for, as you have recommended to you, and that you already have and profit.
And it is that the thigh is placed between your thighs over the shoulder of the patient, and the legs are inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and the hand attempts to plumb or enter if there is resistance in the fistula, when you know the location where the hand penetrates.
And if that leg is around the knee, you cover that you enter the pointed cautery in the knee.
If you feel that the mentioned part has already been discovered and penetrated, another thing you will feel is that it is penetrating; and then do not worry about that, as it is not in this remedy, just as they have said.
This appears to be a sentence from a medieval medical treatise discussing the health of a man named Alcuin. The translation could be: "However, they used to say that a healthy man's body was in
This sentence seems to be discussing the use of cauterization for medical treatment. The translation could be: "However, it is believed that a healthy man's body is in good health if you ignite a small cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert it into the fistula after the wound has healed around the surrounding area; and repeat this process approximately three times when you know that all those adjusted fistulae are as stiff as a quill of feather.
This sentence appears to be discussing the treatment of swelling in limbs. The translation could be: "However, it is believed that this swelling can be reduced by applying pressure on the border of the affected area, and by treating the affected muscles and consolidating them, and if cured, it is well; but if not, the person will not be cured in a short time by another treatment.
This sentence seems to be discussing the removal of a foreign object from the body. The translation could be: "However, if it is attempted and does not penetrate into the said part, and enters between that and the foreign object which is made of flesh or bone, and sometimes the fistula in water that seeps through the surface of the skin, you should dry the skin around the beginning of the fistula, and if the object is seen to be in the fistula, and it pervades to the location where the end of the object reaches, and for the object it is freed and catches.
When you have cleaned and dried those fistulous wounds that are gathered together like the holes of a canula of pain and do not show any cause for them, then proceed as follows:
If the flux comes several times between you and your operation when you open those wounds, then use the instrument that is best suited to cauterize the pus, which can be a foc or a medical acute instrument. The foc should be adjusted with good habits: so it is attached to those adjusted wounds, and the abscission of the excess humidity.
And cure that which is covered with clothes or has been torn inside that place, and then cure the plague by making hard flesh grow and consolidate.
And these medicines in which are stipticated and excised; when you have restored them, they are healed and you do not fear re-treatment.
If the fistula has gone through the heel of the buttock and is extended to the surface of the skin, then enter the liquid that is said in the buttock and investigate what it is.
If you try to touch her and enter through the flesh or skin, and it is directed towards the penetration, then do not operate on her unless after second chance and hope.
The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize that area as has been said; or to make a section in that entrance that allows the conviction of the limb by which you can easily enter those and the subsequent cure; and do not process so that it does not cut through the lasso contained in the wound, and that occurred over the male member's exit; and apply that as they have said for forty years that this will heal; or to stretch that glove and spread that pus that you cut through that entrance as has been said, or to try or another sharp-tipped instrument, and stretch those fistulae that are in the cut so that you can perforate it later; and force you to restore the entire plague by cutting, and if the pus does not solidify, and rupture the open wound in the buttocks, and it will pus through the male member. And for any fistula, this method is used: when you enter the probe into the fistula, and around the circumference of the buttocks at the surface of the skin and on the margin of the buttocks, hold the probe for perforation, which is like a needle for preparing the flesh according to this form:
When entering the abdominal cavity through one of the incisions or around it, and then attempting to enter the fistula through that opening to achieve the concavity of the belly.
If you penetrate the side of the buttock as far as possible, then remove the intestine from that area where you inserted the catheter; and remove the end of the intestine and adjust the two ends according to each other, and stitch them, and leave it for a day or two, and when you insert the catheter into the flesh, stitch it in the area where the flesh is pierced, which are the two ends of the intestine and those that are inserted.
And then cure the wound when it is solidified and healed.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate using any method you are prepared for, except that it must be done quickly so that the catheter does not enter; and when it is healed, make another opening in the area where the catheter was inserted.
The form of the spatulum spinos is what is used to close the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, because that is not necessary, so it is used as many times as possible.
Of the sutures of hematomas in which blood runs into the incision of those.
Hemorrhydas are made of two hands, either between the thighs as if they were made of charcoal, or those are made of something similar to fat. And of those are small and large, and that the blood comes from those places and is one, and the movements, and the outside of the thighs, and at the ends of it.
However, those that are the outside of the thighs are made from the months of little humidity, of which the blood runs clear or a small amount of sweat is continuous, and it is according to the color of the skin.
And the cure of that which is cutting the thigh is that you command to the patient that he rests and that he expresses it when the thigh is not hurting and the hemorrhages appear to you. When you have finished and placed your hand under the patient's thighs, and then raise those parts that you hold in your hands.
If the points are not held in place by humidity or softness of the parts, then take hold of them with your fingers, thumb, or nail, and remove them from the wounds, and place them on the edges of the wounds, and cover them with some powdered dust that is placed at the end of cauterization, so that they remain in place; or cauterize them after the capillary cauterization. And cure those parts in the other treatment when they are healed.
And if the anus does not comply with evacuation, then close it with a cord that is applied to the anus in such a way that it complies with evacuation, and wash it with water that is in the bucket and that complies with evacuation more easily when the anus is emptied.
And if the hemorrhoids are due to the anus, then the cause is leucocytes, and it is because you take hold of those parts with your hand or nail, or take hold of those parts with your points, and place them, and cure those parts in water that has been told to be healed when they are healed.
When the patient has been sewn up, carefully administer sutures with your second hand: hold the needle firmly and insert it into the hole and extract the threads from the parts above, and make it pierce through the hole in the other part and enclose the threads that were extramitated in the part behind the hole, and stretch them latitudinally; and stretch the thread with great force and pull out the needle.
And do this to all, and leave one untouched and do not cut the other, so that the excess of the sanctuary does not run from that.
And place your hand over the buttock and press it with red oil or ointment; and place that on the chest and order the patient to stop. And leave that inside the cage; and when it is healed, treat those as soon as they are sick or as soon as they become healthy again.
When those ancient remedies are not effective in that medicine, you should know that you are using the point of a needle or the tip of your own nail to pierce those humid areas and those that are hostile to those, which are the scars that have been made; and then care for them after they have been consolidated.
If you must use your hands to make those points, do so with great caution when they are inside and have not been shaved; and then care for them after they have been healed.
You know that salving is closed, and it is not done unless the color of the body resembles that of a clavicle, and it is used throughout the body, especially in the feet and toes, and for that pain you must attend to the animal.
And then you should know that it is inserted in this way that it is in the circuit of the clasp, and it is held by the forfices or by one, and it is eradicated from its root; and you should care for that.
If you wish, make a point on the next one that was previously mentioned in the upper part.
Many cases of warts are small, rough, round, and under the surface of the skin, and they spread to more children.
The cure for the wart is that it expands and becomes inserted, or that it presses on that part with a knife or a needle that goes inside. If you wish, make a point according to what has been said, either with a focus or with acute medicine.
Many cases of veruca are small, round, and under the surface of the skin, and they spread to more children. When the wart becomes rough and resembles the bite of a ant, and it is made around the area.
The cure for the wart is that you take a needle of bone or of bone of a volt, and it is strong, and place it over the ant within which it contains the circle of the needle of the parts of the wart; and rotate your hand am the needle inside that it becomes inserted in the circuit of the ant, and place it on the skin of the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
If you want, make a canula of copper or iron in this form:
Shall the beginning of the canula be hollowed out, closed (not perforated), wrapped around it, so that over the same the learning of it is blunted and the revolution of that.
And if you want to cauterize the ant with the one that is given in the cauterization of a thread on the top of the cautery.
In the manner of instruments that are administered to give cristers.
Some vaginas are made of silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some vaginas are made of those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, for the administration of that which is administered in the care of small children is small; and of those of which the ends are rough or roughened, the cristers of those are small.
The form of large and few cristers:
The top of the canula of the one in which the bag is fastened is wide according to this manner; and at that difference, the bag is fastened there as many times as it is.
When the end of the patient's penis is inserted into the anus, it should be done gently, like a lion entering its den; and in one of the testicles there are two ducts, and on the other side one duct, and the width of the duct increases according to the thickness of the veins and becomes large at the end.
If the bag in which the medicines for the bladder of a beast or the wool of a sheep are placed is narrow, and the width of the penis is a palm.
If it is perforated by many ducts that rotate around it; and if the largest part of the said space is entered by the greatest number of ducts.
If you insert your hand into those ducts as far as they are possible, and adjust the bag accordingly; and when you place it on that penis, make sure the bag is placed at the head of the testicles between two distinct points, and for each duct, place the bag on one side: how much quality of cristerizing you do on that penis depends on the tolerance of the patient's thighs; and remember not to be too long or too short.
When the patient's body is lying on their back, and their limbs are raised to their chest, and a pillow is placed under their head, or a cushion; and after the cauterization of the wound with olive oil, or with almond oil, or with muclegregor or with the like; and then it is introduced into the belly with ease, and the midwife takes the bag and expresses the amniotic fluid more and more as it is emptied into the bowl, and then it is removed from the bowl and the patient's limbs are returned to their original position.
If the medicine fails to improve it, hold onto it as much as possible; and if you sleep on it for a whole night, it will not improve.
If you perform the cure on the patient's abdominal pains and the swelling of the limbs, then you will have to repeat the cauterization until it is cured.
If in the belly there are hemorrhages or abscesses, then you must be a very skilled and gentle midwife, among the midwives those whose children are born healthy.
This phrase translates to "Of the cure of the plagues." In the context of medieval medical
This sentence is a bit complex and may require some context to fully understand. However, a rough translation could be: "I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues that this is suitable for free use, and I will say again that the cure of these and other medicines follows the complement." In other words, the cure for these diseases and others should follow a certain set of rules or guidelines.
This sentence translates to "Therefore, say that the diseases are divided according to what they are and according to the location over which they appear." In other words, diseases can be categorized based on their nature and the part of the body where they manifest.
This sentence is quite complex and may require some context to fully understand. However, a rough translation could be: "And the causes that make you have diseases are such as crystallization of uric acid, or incision of the skin or of the chest, or percussion, or puncture, or suturing, or semblance to those of the causes of diseases." In other words, the causes of diseases can be categorized based on various factors such as crystallization of uric acid, incision of the skin or chest, percussion, puncture, suturing, and resemblance to other causes of diseases.
This sentence translates to "The most common diseases that are found in the body are such as plague on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the stomach, and resemblance to those of the limbs." In other words, the most common diseases found in the body include plague on various parts such as the head, neck, chest, stomach, and limbs.
When you are recommending the cure for some diseases by pausing that reasoning and rule over other diseases.
And you begin with the simple headaches, where the remberance of the compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, when an simple headache occurs and there is no fracture, you should consider: if it is due to stone or appearance, and the neck has already been divided justly and is a great pain and fears about that malady having come from apoplexy causation, then you should cut the skull and flesh the head as much as possible, and do not delay; and extract what is necessary from the second part of the skull according to the amount of virtue of the brain if there is no other cause that prohibits fleshing, especially if it is coming from the disease that is causing the headache.
And if the fleshing is on the opposite side of the affected part; and keep the malady of repletion and of vomiting and of heavy viscera.
If during the fasting any cause is prohibited, then you should be less hungry and not approach meat or fat.
And rest over the wound, if it occurs with apthaea cauterization, let the blood flow into an olive-colored spot or into the vein that is being treated.
If you are sure of apthaea cauterization, rest over the wound, if it has recently been cleaned and the air has not changed the powder that you recommend to apply a little.
And if the air has already changed it, rest over the affected area until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to injury and not properly adjusted lips, adjust those sutures according to the recommendation of the sutures you recommend.
If the wound has already been exposed to the bone and does not retain it but only a small suspensory, you may incise that and apply the appropriate treatment for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place of the knee, and command the thigh that is cut from the veins where the flesh grows: caps and form coats and semblances like them, within which it is composed.
If decay has settled in the rotten code and does not adhere to the bone, then you must inscribe this entire poultice with this and apply it, and take care of it.
If these plagues are arteries or veins that can cause pain to the patient, and doctors have not removed them, then you must inquire about the artery, and if it is not inscribed, then you must inscribe it with a spatula; and if this causes the patient discomfort, then you must cauterize it within the artery.
And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is leucorrhea; it is said that you should powder over those this powder, which has become compacted, to prevent the air from moving those.
And the recipe for the powder is as follows: olive oil of one part, dragon's blood of three parts, and no-extinguished parts in equal parts; all are mixed and crushed, and the plague is filled with it, and it is firmly held together by good construction over that which adheres to it, and it is coagulated on the sanc.
And apply pressure to that spot with powder and rub it in, and do not slide it while it is still wet, so as not to waste the medicine until the patient is cured.
And if any veterinarian uses this alone cauterization, when they are not here and cannot give you a dragon's sinew.
And this operation is already performed on the largest pains when it is possible to place it over them and they are straight, and the recent pains of the same person, where the air has not been altered.
And if the air has been altered, and especially during summer, you will not see this powder in its position as it cures those who have said, whether you place your hand over those nests found more distantly, or whether you place your hand over those parts of the dough of the other water and honey that has been mixed; and this cures those in another cure when they are cured.
If you happen to have a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you can remove this with your hands.
When I describe the treatment for fractures of the head, it is called gout by doctors.
Of the ills of the colon.
If the disease occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, and between the gout of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the colon have been cut or the artery, then if it is the nerve, it is not in its place but rather it is avoided surgery as much as possible that causes violent spasms, as it is similar to the windpipe and semblance of the lungs that are not in the nerves and contract in that way. And do not press on the cause of all leakage, which is the substance of the nerves is leaking and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is pushed out from all the members.
And if this is treated with unnatural medicines, then as the water is washed away, some infused olive oil or not-infused, and when the water is washed away and the other peels are minced according to this manner, and they find moisture.
When the plague is large, administer sutures or dress the lips of the patient, and apply care to that part when it is healed.
When the plague is deep or occurs in the lower part of the wound, you should perforate it in a less painful place.
When the plague has already been inscribed on an artery and a flux of blood is produced, you should separate or dry that part, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that.
When the plague has already inscribed the spines of the gallbladder or all, and the veins of the collar are saved, you should adjust the lips of the abdomen with sutures over the gallbladder head and do not touch that; apply equal pressure to that and reduce it over its natural figure, and stretch it gently, and leave it there for a while; and apply care to that part when it is sterilized and excited in the areas where it is inflamed and swollen.
When the plague has already inscribed the bones and causes pain, you should percuss that part, and if in it there are fragments of bones, extract all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it within the plague when it subsides, and separate it and the edge of the bone is alleviated.
If the plague is recent, you should powder that powder which has been recommended to you. If in the plague there is a fistula, you should cure that part with that which has been recommended to you, as the reminder will come appropriately in the head of the capital.
If it is percussion of sponge or cotton, and sometimes of the depth, you should consider if the plague has entered the mouth when the thigh is opened; you know that the plague is fatal.
And if in it there is not depth and the plague is recent to the head of the sanc, you should pause in it of the first powder of the morning, and do not stress that it is not the sac retained in the depth of it and that returns to the heart and that does not attract the mouth, more pause in it you find attractive, and desire that those days have passed.
If the remedy is not at your disposal, you must pause in the orifice of the plague cot to prevent this from happening because of too much moisture; and make the patient lie down over the plague so that it runs out of this adjusted one.
If the plague has already passed for three days or more and there is no spasm, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the throat, and sometimes other good dispositions of the patient, you know that the plague is safe; and then cure that joint pain and the other curative treatment as soon as it is healed.
If the cure of the patient is postponed and it takes a long time to be opened, you know that a fistula has already been made; then cure that joint pain for the benefit of the head.
If the plague is due to compression of the abdomen or chest, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or belly, you cure that joint pain by sewing it if it is large, or by powdering it if it is small.
If joint pain has already been made in the bones and there are already pus-filled cavities, you must tighten the plague and extract those puss from it if they are separated. If they are not separated, you should wash the parts that get wet with pus, as the extraction of them is difficult.
When other diseases occur in the other members, the treatment for this is the treatment of that which has been called.
When the diseases of the stomach.
The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or bitter.
And a small dislocation is difficult to do with another hand, and if it is not easy to reduce them, then do not make the insertion of them into their place so soon, because they will be squeezed and become engorged so that the insertion of them is difficult.
And the better dislocation is small, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the special cases mentioned.
And you know that the suture of the stomach is second to four hands, and less common sutures are those that are used in the sutures of other diseases of the chest.
When two of these own stitches communicate with other afflictions, but not their own in the abdominal stitching.
And I recommend to you every examination and declaration.
When the affliction is small and occurs due to any cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then you are in one of two hands: either because of the slight rupture as they have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And when it is inflamed, you should know that you should cover that with a cloth that you have submerged in warm water alone, or that you have dipped in warm water, vinegar, and cyperus, and spicery, and essential oils, and you should apply it to the belly until the inflammation is resolved.
And some people have seen that this has steeped in water, and it is better than the water alone to resolve the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation being resolved, you should moisten the intestine with water in which it was soaked in aloe and mallows, for then the intestine is allayed by little cause.
If the intestine of the patient is tightly closed in this treatment, then you should divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that has not yet been used on injured tissue.
The first line of the translation is: "The primary treatment is better when it is not cut and does not cause any loss.
When it comes to the instrument, its shape is as follows:
One part of the sharp edge, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is delicate, and it should not be rough like the sharpness of a needle, but rather it should be hard at its tip.
When the plague spreads and comes out of the belly, then you should know that its reduction should be in the form of the natural shape of the organ, in the appropriate place, if possible, over there, it is better.
When the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should know that you should lay the patient on their stomach and stop the changes that are not suitable for the belly; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should stop the head of the patient and put the chest in a position that is not suitable for the parts that have been done.
And if it seems that the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should stop your attention and your consideration for a moment to see which part has the plague so that the other part is not affected.
And it is important that you administer this in the large and small plagues.
And in the small plagues, stop that which is in your preparation and apply that which is between your most thin layers, which holds the disruption completely with its own means and adjusts the lips of the patient, and remove from there to there that which causes another wound.
This is the common suture method: one that grasps the gauze, according to the number of times it fits around the wound; and then releases it at the end of the disruption of that ring, and pulls the gauze one way, or another that you do not insert your fingers into the ends of the chain, but into the ends of the cipher that leaves the chain of parts, when it penetrates from that part; and you have already added the ends of the chain and the ends of the cipher, and then make four orders.
And then tighten the double thread in the circuit of the gauze, and some eyes of parts are seen, and add a few more lips and plaques for addition; and release the size of that and put another gauze on it as if it was the first one; and do not stop doing this until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
And the threads are finer between the cloth and subtlety, four of the subtle ones make small incisions in the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to insert into the chain, and therefore it is necessary that they be fine in subtlety and thickness.
It is not necessary for the needle to be placed at the extremities of the first rib, because if the flesh is not scarred firmly and the abscess oozes before its consolidation, it will cause pain.
The wounds should not be prolonged with stitches so that the abscess is not prevented from consolidating.
If the needles are firmly fixed on their ends so that the patient does not feel pain, and you place your hand over the expanded pulvis on all parts, holding the ends of the needles; and when you leave them after knowing that the abscess is consolidated.
These types of sutures are suitable for needles in the hands of the patient, which are enough in the suture of their needles or around them.
The second suture is as follows: and it is that you administer through the suture to the four ends of the rib, the two ends of the cuff, in a line, with an needle in which there is a fine engagement in subtlety and size.
When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that metal piece from which you began, so that the true vagina of the subcutaneous part can be closed again, so that the suture is one stitch away from the drape that the cloth you used was sewn with.
And pause between each stitch the amount of the large of the said needle.
And this stitch is good for men.
And if this stitch is used to close the wound that was injured in a man's belly, which had been infected with an abscess, and was the rupture of the abscess of a palm, and was inflamed around two palms of the intestine, and was the disruption of the intestine; and then you reduce that depressed part that the intestine had been for the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and was cared for that and was healed; and afterwards it was purified for many years, and was converted to its own conditions.
When the other doctors had failed to heal the patient; and by miracle, this one who could not cure that ailment, which was located in the place where there was no wound or any medicine, but rather, it was due to the plague of two vaginas that day and constant urination, which was cured by fire.
May you be able to describe two types of suture in the next narrative of Paraula.
And is that you understand that the suture of the abdomen, and then insert an awl from the defective part to the intact part.
And so, when the awl penetrates into the abdomen and through all the muscles, and leave the end of the cipher in the place where you have inserted the awl; and then let the other end of the awl from the defective part to the intact part in the other end of the glove.
And if you have managed to make that penetrate, then you will make another penetration in the other end of the glove of the defective part to the intact part; and leave the extremity of the cipher that is in this hole, and let the awl penetrate the awl in the other end of the defective part to the intact part.
When you insert your hand into the vagina, it should be done in a way that allows you to reach the cervix at the end of the vagina, which is located in the part of the body where the penis enters.
Then, continue along this side and extract the bullet from the socket, and return it to its original position in the socket, and extract the end of the penis that is on the other side of this extraction; and extract the entire bullet from the socket.
Then make another incision and another, and make another incision in the same way that you cut everything according to that example.
The sum of this suturing is that you cut the epidermis, which cuts the hair, in such a way that you cut the vagina with one incision at the end of the socket, and it leaves the other incision inside when the vulva is closed.
The second type of suture is the one that Gualia recommends, and this is for the patient to follow according to their doctor's advice, as you should cut that part according to what the doctors cut, in such a way that you add all parts to the corresponding part of its natural form; and apply the ends of one side and the end of the penis to the other end of the body, and it is then followed as recommended by me.
When you have placed the needle at the end of the incision on your own hand, and made it penetrate into the wound in that direction, and seen two ends of the cipher; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the opening into the wound through two ends of the cipher.
And then rotate those points, and make them penetrate into the wound from the opening through two ends of the incision that are opposite to the one you have just made in the opposite direction.
And this suture is better than the common suture, and is the one that was previously remembered.
This is the saying of Guillaume.
And maybe they tell you that the abdominal suture is corrected by two needles, so that you enter through each one with a needle, and then start with the needle that you must use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those that close the belly.
And you know that when there is a rupture in the lower part of the abdomen, it is difficult to perform the suture compared to other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of medical treatment for plague is made by the other plagues.
The cause is that when you manage to capture the recent plague in the presence of the sacred denouncement that the air has altered there, and reduce the intestine and bowels there, and are suitable for that decently, then place your hand over that enchanted powder.
If the air has already altered the plague, then place your hand over that alchemy which contains those which you have in presence at the time when they produce hard pebbles and crush the fields, and are solid and clear; and take care of that plague as the cure of other plagues is when it is healthy.
If you do not have the presence of medicines, then place your hand over that potion which begins to get wet, and comb your hair, change your clothes, and permute those two veins in the day, as you have and teach, when the plague is healthy, so that you do not prescribe another medicine in positioned ways when the plagues are simple.
If you fear that the plague spreads to the main members, then cover that lion's wool with watered olive oil of quality or rose oil, and place it in the circuit of the loci which are between the angles and further the asses' legs.
If you feel pain or putrefaction in the testicles, four ways are usually used to apply it, which is to cristerize that black stiptic with four views, and especially if the prostate is perforated and an exit penetrates into the cavity of the conquavitat.
You know that that which is from the testicle is of less medicinal value than that which is in the subtle testicles.
It is of difficult cure that the testicle which is called "gundu" does not receive plague from the vessels which are in it; and this is because of the great number of veins which are there, and because of the size of the testicle, and because of its subtlety, and because it is near to the nature of the nerves.
If this is what you do from the plague, and the result is that you reduce the opening of the mouth, then return to your own rule, and reduce those testicles that are enguant.
If it has passed through that space and you have already done good or black, then you who strengthen that which is near to the place that is denigrated of it, by so that comes flows of sanc, four in the tela are veins and arteries.
When you have inserted the other limb into the opening, pause the two extremities of the gouty foot at the end of the plague forum, so that above your hand, the attraction of the gout may cause the cloth to tighten and expel the pus from the plague.
Remember the plagues that occurred when they entered the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because I have seen that which was once infected with the plague in the stomach by percussion of a hand and was the plague of the left part of the stomach, and the plague was an old one and made a fistula, and it was treated and ventilated.
And if you have completed the cure of the patient, even if it was not convinced in the care of the physician, I stopped subtleizing that which healed and the location is consolidated.
And if you think that the location is already consolidated, time over the thighs where you will go over the accident of the stomach; and do not encounter anyone for that accident and ram into the mouth of his dispossessed possessions eating and drinking, and then return to the bath and exercise in your speech.
When the patient suffers from diarrhea and it is small, it is customary to apply this remedy: and that you take large goblets; and accordingly adjust the lips of the diarrhea and stop one goblet of those that are in the lips of the diarrhea; therefore, when you over the lips and tighten your mouth, you will split the goblet of the patient, which adheres and does not dissolve.
Then stop another fly near the first one, and do not stop making flies until you have made as many as the quantity of the diarrhea.
Then reduce that and see how the diarrhea reduces; and apply those caps to the belly after it has been made healthy, and do not cause any harm to the thighs.
It is possible that the intestine is visible due to a small substance that is made from the intestines of animals, which is more like a needle; and that you take the extremity of these intestinal threads, and it is not dirty, and place it at the extremity of the hole in the flesh, envelop it, and enter it into the needles and into the flesh of the intestine, and reduce it in disruption.
This maneuver of stitching is not only second in faith and hope.
If the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the intestines, then no matter how skilled you are, you will not be able to treat it completely.
Of cure for a zuchem and fistula.
You know that all plague and aphthae when they are suppressed and in the ancient times, and an ulcer is made, and it does not get consolidated and gets bigger over time and does not abscess, everybody calls it a fistula and we call it that ulcer.
And if fistula is secondarily formed, hard, white, and not painful, but of the same shape as the wound of labor; and for that reason it is called that abscess, which is pain.
And in the abscess of moist flesh, it gets bigger; and very soon the moisture is abscessed in some hours. And some people have noticed this moisture, it is few, it is thick, and it is subtle.
All those causes have been shown, and the remedies for them are in the hands of doctors in the division.
And how do you know the cure for fistula which is caused by operation in the division?
When you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; four of those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the bladder, or the vesica, or to any of the costae, or to any of the spinal columns of the two, or to any of the joints composed of the asy and foot; and those that give proximity to the main member and resemblances.
And for this type of fistula that is followed by this manual, it is one of the difficulties in the treatment of maladies, and does not receive care, and there is an occupation that is unpleasant and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas that does not reach the depths of those places that I mentioned, and you hope and trust in the cure of the disease, and you want to reach knowledge of the disease, then try with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows correctly, and ask for that which is good for it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that which is good for it by trying to draw a subtle thread, for the thread of the living heart is lifted and curved because of the twisting.
If the fistula has many horrible features, it is not possible for you to understand what I mean about this attempt.
Since Christ was crucified by his own crucifixion, the water through which he was nailed must have been used for the other crucifixions as well.
If you inquire particularly, it is possible that you can determine if you have bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the long or short fistula is the one with the horrible features, or if it is a fistula with horrible features that is over all of your strength, all of your entombment, which entombs the thighs, and the cure of the pain depends on the compression of the hand over the location, and resemblances to the significance and causes of accidents in the amputation.
If you have been aware of all those causes, you will see the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent adjacent fistula or in the location, long in joint, or far from the joint, or from nerves, or from artery, or from vein, or from one of the places which you have and say.
When you wet the fistula according to what is said about the narcotic of the patient, and let it be known that it is in that filtration and of rotten carns, and that it was born in the slaughterhouse of the carn, or of the thigh and of the semblance, and care for that entrance which is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and follows the rectum, you should cover it as deeply as possible in the pre-anus, and modify all of its rotten carns; and administer envelopes filled with acute medicines, and introduce them into the fistula's cavity, which you have understood with iron.
And use some sharp ones for those who are in the cavity of the fistula, which the acute medicine has corrupted completely that is inside the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
And restore those as soon as possible which bring healthy carns inside when it is healed.
If it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize that according to what has been recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify this, then you should inquire about it and dry that second part which has been recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or primary member as they have said.
If the bone is discovered and found to be corrupted and blackened, then you should remove that part where the corruption is located; and then care for that part with this remedy that it may become healthy again.
If it is not healthy and mobile as it should be, you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you discover another way and carefully make the reason of it and its mutilation in the same place with the fortalasa tieua, and then restore it.
And if it becomes healthy, then so be it; and if not, you know that that corruption is in the deep depths of the heart, which has not been able to, and therefore for you there is no other remedy than to have that.
And if the bones become corrupted, or they are as small as possible, then you should remove that part with your best effort using forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if those bones are very small, then you should carefully make the extraction of all of them, and those do not have any cause for distress in your strength.
If you have any opposition to any cause of the cold humors, and if there is no fear or mistake in their inscription, then you should inscribe those lines or bones where they are, and remove the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones of your hour, then stop over the plaque that is irrigating the plaque of that bone and carne and limb, and let the plaque be unsolidified and reinforced in the section you have inscribed in your operation.
If you fear, stop over the cotton submerged in hot oil, or the Egyptian anguent, or in the belly of the green enguents, when they have been separated from those lines, and the bones are separated from the ablation, and the atraccio is alleued.
If you have a great bone that is like the bone of camba or ham and thigh, and that part of it is corrupted by the face of it, then you should cut that am only behind that negress and corruption, and proportionately restore the plaque.
If the body of the bone is corrupted to a great extent, and the corruption has reached the medullary cavity of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entire opening into the location where the corruption has pervaded, and you treat that within which it has become solid.
I advise you to go to a man in his thighs so that you can pause there and have an assistant to help with your operation.
A young man of approximately xxx years old suffered pain in his thigh, and there were many bad parts on the material of the body that had been pervaded by the matter of the body through the thigh, and it was matter of gout, not from an external cause.
And then extend the time because of the error of the doctors who had placed the gout in the thigh, and the materials were corrupted, and the cure was delayed until the hole was closed, and there were many things in that part that got perforated and the humidity of the body.
When the care of many doctors surrounded him for several years, and he did not know about it in his art, then you were called.
When I saw the wound of the patient and the materials that came out of it through those great wounds; and all of that man's body was completely swollen and his color was yellowish.
Then I inserted the needle into one of those wounds and it reached the bone.
Then I examined all of the wounds and found that they had reached every part of the wound.
Then I wrapped the wound and inserted something over it, and I saw a piece of bone inside the wound, which was rotten, terrible, and corrupted; and a part of the wound had already become corrupted when it had penetrated into the flesh.
And then I realized that this was discovered and prepared by the bone discovered.
And you knew that it was not in the bone but in that corruption that had been absorbed and hidden, and you had already fallen.
And then you paused the restoration of the plague with conservative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
When you have thoroughly examined the bone and discovered the first sign of corruption on the bone, continue to examine the rest of the bones.
And I will inform you of what appears to be the corruption of that bone, and then perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you discovered another vein and did not stop engraving the bones particularly and performing the restoration of the bone, but it was not restored until I cut around a palm of the bone, and that extracted from the marrow of the bone, and then restored it with medications, and it became slightly solid and healthy.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and sectioning of the bone except for the disposition of the bladder and the lack of tolerance of the bladder and the kidney, where the accident occurred in all hours due to excessive evacuation without proper sinusoidal drainage.
And it is healed by the whole cure, and there is nothing hard in the bones; and it is good for the disposition of the body in the healthy limbs and returns the virtue of the body; and it is discussed in their dispositions and no harm is done in ambulation nor damage in any cause.
If you find pain in the chest, then follow this hand: and take hold of the limb and stretch it at its end, and command that it extends over the first limb; and cut off the limb of that lana pus gross than the first limb; and place that limb on the flesh that is left of the chest, and extend the extension of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you will discover the flesh over the location that you want to squeeze so that it does not squeeze the flesh.
And pause for a while the table of the feet, so that when you do this it is not forbidden to cut that does not cut the corrupt flesh.
And make sure that the cutting is over the location of the corrupt little by little, so that if it is in the concavity of the corrupt bone and does not appear at its appearance in the feeling, and force the cutting of the other watched.
And if the bones are corrupt and not painful, then advance one part continuous at another, and the corruption is in the end or in the first part, then you will discover all the flesh of all parts; and pause for a while here, and cut that of the first part where the corruption is when it is continued the cutting of the other part.
If the swelling is located in the area of corruption, then a small piece should be taken, as they have said.
If corruption is in the joint, insert into that corrupt joint, and set the bones that continue from another part.
If of the corruption is in the continuance of many joints, you are not in this reason but engaged.
If corruption is in the breast of the man or foot, it is very difficult; but cover that you ask for the corruption in what manner appears to you, and open that, and order it after each other according to your ability, and may this be possible, and if not, contrary to your will, blood or nerve.
You know what are inscisions and the bars to insert into those bones are most according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and minuteness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for all kinds of operation instruments suitable for that operation.
You know that this operation means to you over the species of the instrument you request; when you have great study and long experience in the hands of this art, and testimony of hands of diseases, where the hands already you have made those which are convenient for you in all parts of the disease.
When you are forming the end of this capital, the number of the instruments that you will use as simply as possible according to those that you will process in your prohibited practice, which you will experience on others. The shape of the saw:
1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part
1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the
1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that 1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When it does not seem fitting otherwise, it is necessary that the corners of the joints be sharpened when they are corroded, or if the mouth is very wide.
Form of razor's edge of smaller size:
Form of razor's edge in Latin:
The form of the other razor's edge should be such that it is sharp like the point of a sword and the member of the body is gently cut, making it less harsh. Form of "it":
Form of razor's edge in which it has concavity:
Form of razor's edge that is another subtle one:
Form of another razor's edge with a curved end:
Form of razor's edge that resembles a tent:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a blade and its end is sharp, and it is displayed in certain parts of the bones.
This is a description of the shape of a bone that corresponds to the size of the hole in it.
When the end of the body is triangular and sharp-pointed.
And it is made of Indian iron, and apparently all the causes that have been said of razors and scissors and bars are.
Of the cutting edge and the compression of the bones.
The ends can be smeared either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the medicine does not cure, sometimes the corruption leaves the member that does not suffer from any cause, it seems that you have made the member enter this way to the hon of the corruption, so that the evacuation of the evacuation of the body is for the death or malice that is the greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member is made black inside because it is what that burns, or it can be covered with the blackness inside that pierces that part of the body which seeks to hold all the corpse and take the whole body; and then you have an inscription on that.
When it seems that the cause of the corruption is due to the percussion of certain venomous causes, such as that of the scorpion's sting or of a poisonous plant or of a similar one, then...
If the corruption or the percussion is at the end of the digit, then you should insert the digit and do not give space for the corruption to enter the womb.
If it seems that you have reached the womb, then you should insert the digit into the root of the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter that holds in the thumb of the arm.
If you are unable to reach it, then insert the arm inside the thigh at the joint.
If another corruption passes and the tail is sometimes outside the thigh, then in that is the death of the patient; and it is necessary to administer another cause or another in quantity of virtue.
When it seems that the corruption is at the foot of the foot, then you should insert it into one of the nails.
If you hold on to the heel of the foot, then you should insert the whole foot. If it may enter the dressing, you should insert the candle into the hole within the joint of the dressing.
If corruption has already spread over the dressing, you should not engage in it but dismiss it, and leave the body to die.
The way to insert the member or tie it is that you stretch the limb over the part where you want to insert it, and stretch another limb over its place; extend the minister one limb to the parts that are left, and extend another limb in theirs; then separate the flesh that is between two limbs by cutting it in half lengthwise if it is discovered entirely, and stitch or tie it.
And make sure that there is a piece of cloth from all parts that do not touch the place, and that it comes to the body with the adjusted wound and sew it.
If you happen to spill blood when working, you should cauterize the wound area or place it on some powders that tighten the blood; and return to your medication when it is complete.
When treating the affected member with the appropriate tool, and care to enter it until it is healthy.
And I advise you to go to a man in the city who has had this accident, which you and I have recommended, which is similar to the black one in the city that was burned due to a fire that was set.
And that corruption first occurs in the city's entrance when you try to hold it all in.
And then that man prepares for himself the tools he needs to enter the curacy into the member with great force and vehemence, and immediately that part of the body enters the joint, and it becomes healthy.
For a long time, this corruption has occurred in the city's indicated member.
And then I win, and my perforated reflection returns to the excess that I had over the world of the body, the mundification of the face; and it is not reflected in the excess and begins to enter another part that begins in the face.
And the appetite makes me insert my hand into the member of the body, and you do not want to expect over there about the reflection of that excess, and more than you fear, you must insert your hand into the death of the body, where the virtue of the city was over carnality.
It seems that the text is describing a medical procedure or treatment. Here's my attempt at translating the first source sentence:
When I have not told this story for anything other than that it is an assistant over this matter and that it has a meaning for what is meant and secondly for what is done.
Regarding the treatment of the spine and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
When gout occurs in the fleshy parts of the body and the area of the gout is prolonged because it collects filth, and it breaks and pierces, and the sickness is excreted, and the location is considered as if it were empty, and the cord that is removed from it is like fine linen, and no corruption is found in the bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a sinus, and no fistula is formed.
However, if the space is prolonged because corruption presses on some member, it is called a fistula and we do not allow it.
And the treatment of the wound is that it is inserted into that cord as much as it can turn, and mainly when it is made fine and becomes like linen, and comfortable that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If you hope that the gallbladder adheres and that corruption does not follow due to another cause, and if there is a lot of redness in the gallbladder, then you should treat that with a remedy.
If you consider the intestine, and if it is large, and the smell of the bile is strong, then you should treat that with an Egyptian remedy made of oil and vinegar that receives parts of ginger and cloves, and they are adjusted in a container, and they are placed over the fire within which that remedy is melted and it reaches a certain temperature.
And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and treat that remedy to the intestine, strengthen the opening of the gallbladder, and place the medicine in the gallbladder according to the number of hours.
And then take that which is precious and use it for so many days within which the intestine is dissolved and the skin becomes moist.
And some remedies are treated with fire, when this medicine is not presented to you; and if you take the coal from the fire, and put water over it, and then close it and treat that remedy inside which you think that intestine has come out.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ashes of smoke, you should list that ash and honey and mix them in equal parts, and list that honey and water mixture, where half of the properties of honey is to cleanse and wash, and it adheres to the sinus, especially when there is excessive dryness and suffocation.
And when you have made gout on some wounds and feel that the sinus has already become inflamed, you should list that honey mixture to make the flesh smoother in it.
And is that you take the ointment of dead sea water and dissolve that honey in rose oil, or that you list that honey mixture with other ointments and enguents that have the properties which I have already written in the book on ointments.
If the sinus opening is straight and the canula of the clyster is not received in that direction, you should list that honey mixture little by little, and stop when it is amplified, and wrap it in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside that.
When the incision seems to be wide, you should add more stitches of the patient's lip and reduce the number of stitches in the quantity that is inside the clitoris.
And if the incision of the part where the bracelet is placed is elevated towards the parts on either side, you should dry it in the lower place that is in it so that the bracelet does not enter further, because the bracelet is cut in the pregnant cavity of the flesh.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the bone according to your preference, you should perforate that member for preparation according to the one that corresponds to the bracelet less than what you consider and that it is not retained by any cause of the bracelet.
When one is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains closed throughout the hour because it is adjusted to the bone in that part of the shoulder. And for what reason do you know if the pain of the bone is from the shoulder or not, or is it digested or not?
And if you also consider the location of that sinus, whether or not the patient feels pain there, and if it is in the area of the attack.
And when your treatment is prolonged in that manner, and you see the material that was applied over the orifice of the sinus adheres, or it becomes appropriate to adhere, then you hold the drip in your hand or the next day, and when you remove the drip, you change the cloth and renew the application.
And if the sinus has less space and subtle viruses, you will not despair of the adhesion of it, because the treatment of the body is appropriate, because in those homes where generations of flesh are formed in such plagues, and in those where the opposite is done.
If the intestine has not adhered to itself for three days and there is no sign of improvement, know that the intestine will not adhere; and if the adhesion of the intestine is delayed and prolonged, then adjust the intestine in exsiccation with medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry like leather when adjusted after the addition of zegi.
When the most difficult part of the treatment is reached, it is necessary to take out the dead tissue and cut it off in a round shape, and place it on top of the wound, covering it with a layer of fresh earth, and then close it with that.
And when it seems to be in that state, if there is no brace, cut off the dead tissue as much as possible, and use that; or if you take mirrors and open them and put them on, and sprinkle some over the mel that is engorged, and strengthen that over the sinu; and put that over the mel that you have cut off, and sprinkle some over the drap and strengthen that.
And some prescriptions are administered in long-term aristology and are considered to be of the finest lilies (and lilies are) and flour of erries and centaury, and use those simple or adjusted ones, cut them off and crumble them and sprinkle some over the mel that I recommended, and apply it.
And if the sinu is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you know that the corruption is in the preon of the patient, and you make an investigation in the bones or in other hard members or ligaments; then you cure the patient with the curacio fistular, as it is said.
When treating a case of fingernails that are worn down and have had the tip of the finger cut off, and then sliced in half, it is necessary to operate on the affected area.
When the blister or ganglion is removed from the skin of the knee or foot, and it is not found in other places, and it is prolonged and the care is very expensive, or it is punctured with a puncture, or it becomes corrupted, and it breaks within the skin as it corrodes the root of the blister, and it corrupts the entire thing, and it pervades its corruption into the bone that is inserted in the fetid odor, and the end of the said lump is made, and its color becomes black.
And when you have that aforementioned remedy that has been said in division and does not satisfy your care, then you must know that you have to insert the iron completely into the superfluity that is rising from the blister and cut off the cauterization at that place, for the cauterization is not suitable for this.
If the bone is healthy and the blister is sound, and the additives of the blister want to compromise the parts that are divided into segments, and they begin to push and lead them, then you must know that you have to pause a small amount of the angle of the blister that punctured the flesh, and push it inside and insert it into the flesh with ease, and pause over it until the corrosive drugs of the medicines that are burning come out; and the care will be cured when it is completely healed.
When corruption has already set in within the bones, you should immediately cut away the affected bone and its surroundings, as no time is lost if it is the bone that is corrupted.
If the corruption and corruption often occur in that place, you should immediately cut away that part according to which side is remembered, and carefully care for it as soon as it is healed.
If there is pain at the end of the thigh and it becomes more severe, you should immediately cut open the thigh, and carefully clean the area with water, making sure to not let the cut reach the flesh that is yet left in the place; and carefully care for that area as soon as the pain subsides, and make sure that the cause of the pain is not superfluous in the location.
If there is any adjustment that is often found in the largest number of men, it is mostly flesh, and mostly in the bones or in the thighs.
And if the sons of it are born in the joint, or is the origin of them in the flesh of the joints? When a person is not born in cold regions, it does not harm them, and a person born in joint pain regions is more prone to it.
When those who are from the country are cut, and it is necessary to insert the blade, you must insert it at an angle of 45 degrees.
When the person is born in the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore, keep away from the abscess of it.
When the person is born in the eye, you must pay attention to the teeth; and therefore, insert the blade at the beginning of the flesh, and then cut it with one of those convenient razors, and cure that within which is healthy.
Less consolidation is caused by the wounds that occur between the joints of the visible or native limbs, or due to the consolidation of the plague or combustion of the fire, or for its resemblance, therefore, pay attention to the return of those wounds to their natural form.
And stop between them the enfused threads in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate between them or place a thin layer of silk between them after it is consolidated as it is possible to see.
If it seems that there is consolidation in any part of the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and adapted to the shape of the member.
From the scar, it is varicose veins.
Varicose veins are varicose veins, and they are fat, full of melancholic superfluities that flow through the members of the body, and more so in the thighs and buttocks, and especially in the thighs and buttocks of travelers and laborers and those who wear tight clothing.
However, it is important that you administer purification of the heart of black blood through some veins that are expelled with force, and then take blood from the patient from the basilar vein.
The cure of them is second only to two hands: one is that it is inscribed and struck with the dark sanctuary, and the other hand raises the vein and extracts all of it.
The incision of the member is made according to this hand: the doctor begins by cutting the cauda of the member, after which the sac is removed that contains the gallbladder, and the hand strengthens the sac of the thigh at the point where the wound is clean and dry, and presses the vein in a place, or in two, or in three according to the size of the incision, and raises the black sac am the tip of the wound inside the member, and desus in juice, after which the sac contains as much of the gallbladder as you want and as many times as it can hold, and it tolerates the virtue of the thigh.
When you have applied the ointment and commanded him to abstain from black, colorful clothing that causes colic,
and continue the cure with incision if the veins are dilated and you notice swelling in the thigh,
Then elevate the thigh as follows: you who raise the thigh, if it is tight, and place the thigh in the bucket and massage the thigh with warm water that flows in when it contracts and the veins are swollen; or if it has been exercised by strenuous exercise, if the bucket is not at your disposal, then when the member is sore,
and cut the tendon at the right of the vein for incision on the long or short side of the thigh, or on the inside of the thigh, you must take the skin.
and cut the tendon with an inch and remove the vein from the entire area where it appears at the sensation, and you must take the appearance of the vein that sometimes goes into the black.
And so when you cut and remove the tendon, you see that white string is rope.
When you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, then you should place your hand on the elevated and swollen part of the knee, and suspend the thread on that one.
Then make another cut in the same place for three times, and remove the skin from the area where the vein appears.
Then raise that and insert the tendon into the second cut, and remove that and lift it within which is soft for the second cut, and remove that from the cut that is over it.
And make that within which you remove the entire pus from all cuts, and then insert it.
And if you do not obey and extract and raise it, then insert a needle of double strength and tighten it on that and remove it, or insert the thread first and rotate your hand over the entire area where it is inflamed. And keep in mind that it is not inserted; then if it is torn, it will be difficult to raise that arm and it will come over the thigh for that harm.
When the whole wound is fully exposed, place yourself over the location of the submerged hairy skin, which is either red or not red, and care for that as it heals.
If the wound is obstructed by an obstacle that envelops all parts of it, and there is no straight path after that, then you should cover that with your hand over the entire obstruction of the wound and the surrounding areas of the wound, and suspend it in that manner as you raise it to the level where it was originally.
And keep your section safe that you have not pierced the vein and that it does not cause any damage; and use your prudence in this.
The form of the incision made by the wound is:
It is not the accutely pointed wound as the cautery or of sharp extremity by which it would pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility, if it were subtle, would pierce the vein by its subtlety; there are in it superfluous roughness of the wound as they have said.
Extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs of low-lying lands, such as the Ategi in Arabia and in the low, dry lands of India with little fertility and without grass or shrubs.
When the pain is caused by other parts of the body, other changes occur.
The cause of the pain is putrid matter that I see coming out of the chest, like venom from snakes and spiders and scorpions, which are born between the chest and the flesh.
The susceptibility to the occurrence of pain is due to this vein that occurs in this inflamed and swollen area; and the location is pustulated; and the vein begins to appear at the location of that pustule, which seems to be of plant origin.
And when it appears at the end, you cover that one with a pouch of blood from the which is the foot of a dragon. Enter into it, and notice that one and let the blood hang down from the swelling.
So many wonders have been seen by the cause of the pain in the deformed parts, covered with blood and noticed. If it is prolonged, you insert a part of the body and envelope the wound; and if not inserted, that is outside and in, then if inserted, it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes apposition and pother and ulceration in the place and malodor.
When treating swelling and removing it little by little, enter when it has been expelled from the body and does not return to the body without any cause in the chest.
This vein is usually found in men who have a long distance of twenty fingers and I have heard that one of them has been twenty-two fingers long.
And if it is inserted at the time of medication, insert the ray into the throat and pierce that long throat through the chest, entering when all of this matter has been evacinated from the body and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and cure it with the cure of apostemas.
This vein has some varicose veins, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and goes to that orrifice, and is found in many orrifices, and is located in many orrifices.
And cure it as has been said in the division and according to what has been said.
Of the cut, the generated veins under the skin are called bovine disease.
This malady is caused by a cow's udder, as if several wheats have been seen in the belly and there is a little one that comes between the spine and the flesh, and it goes all over the body and causes pain, and it is shown in the feeling of the member to member that comes out of the spine.
The generation of the child is caused by the putrefaction of some humors, such as worms, snakes, and insects, and feces in the intestines.
And it is feared for the wickedness of him, that when he comes to the heart and is raised to the head, and passes through the neck, if he stretches it too much, then the neck bends and the vertebrae are destroyed, and thus many wounds are caused.
And then when you want to heal that and remove it, you should not do so if you do not have the ambulance and appearance of the member in your hand, and then cover that which is over it and that which is further away from it with a wet cloth and extract that.
And if it presses on the flesh and does not burn, then you should stop cauterization with a hot iron over the place from which it comes, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh which corrupts the place as they have said.
If you ever see that it has come to the head of the neck, then you should hold firmly over the tightened scalp with a wet cloth and extract that; and cover that this evil is used for the improvement of the healthy heart by medicines that expel putrid humors from the body and prevent the generation of putrefaction.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it
This affliction is common in our land, and it causes pain that spreads to different parts of the body, and it can affect one part of the body after another.
When you have already seen that which I recommended to you. I was called to attend a woman with a swollen arm in a village, and I found that her arm had a small inflammation in the funis vein, and after an hour, I saw that the inflammation had disappeared as if it had been turned into something else, but I did not insist on whether it was true or false.
And then the pain in that place became apparent and remained in the muscle, and after an hour, it stopped.
And I cured the other arm that was affected by the other arm.
And I recommend that you revive the other arm if you see that this one is affected by the other arm; and it is too wonderful to change the position of the limb and the speed of the member. And you had already seen that in the best hands this would have been done, but you have seen that those who do not suffer from pain want to exchange members for limbs. I did not see that in the hands as I saw in the woman.
When I first realized that it was not gout but something else, it was because the woman was very young, with a corpulent body and visible veins, and in this case, there was a feeling of that altered sensation.
And it is necessary that this posterior cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have corpulent veins that are not easily affected.
And when you want the patient's cure and they feel that pain, then you should not immediately appear at their side as they have been told, but rather stay there and hold their hand and cover that area with something warm and then cauterize the spot.
If you do not see the woman's face, then you should cure her with your cure and expel that altered sensation from the heart and this that expels ventsitudes, and carminative pills of those made from saffron and serapin and semblants.
Extraction of sage.
Sage is diverse according to the species and the locations of the heart where it is extracted, for the greatest diversity is found in those that have large points, and small, concave, and narrow ones, and they are solid; and from those that have three angles, and from those that have tongues, and from those that have stars.
When the second member or limb is affected, if you notice that in it there are signs of death, which causes you to recommend that you avoid extraction from that sauce in which the death appears, and if you do not see these bad signs in the first member or limb, and the sauce is not disturbed in the depth of the member, then you extract that and treat the plague. If you notice that in the second member or limb there are signs of death, such as the brain being affected by violent inflammation, loss of vision, vertigo, and collapse of the limbs, and swelling of the tongue, and spasms and permixtion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the word is cut off and destroyed the voice, and you see the sign of the plague in a wet white-like appearance resembling polls, and you see the sign approaching the flesh.
If you see these symptoms appearing, then avoid the cure and the extraction of the pus, unless it comes out.
When the woman's labor pains are felt in the belly, and that side of her is nearest to the left, and it feels like a movement of the hand, and the pulse is black and watery, and there is coldness in the extremities, and shivering, and sweating; and you see that death is coming on, then you know that she is about to give birth.
When the woman's labor pains are felt in the belly, and that side of her is nearest to the left, and it feels like a movement of the hand, and the pulse is black and watery, and there is coldness in the extremities, and shivering, and sweating; and you see that death is coming on, then you know that she is about to give birth.
And if the woman's labor pains are felt in the sacrum which is in the chest, and the pain occurs in the small backbones, and great pain is felt in the belly, and the breath is so spasmodic, and not all the muscles of the body are involved.
And if the woman's labor pains are felt in the stomach, the pain is strong and it feels like vomiting undigested food.
If the physician is in the belly, and it is fixed there, and any part of the plague, or cloth, or intestine that is disrupted, and there is no hope for the removal of the physician from the belly.
If the physician is in the bladder, and it is discharged into urine, and processed by any cause to the affected parts, and there is great pain in the thighs, you know that it is fatal.
Other parts of the body are similar to the face, neck, and shoulders, as well as the spine, vertebrae, and acromion, and the shoulder blades, and the armpits, and they resemble the limbs when the physician does not block veins or arteries and is not venomous.
And I recommend this to you that you have seen of the nature of these physicians, because it indicates for you about the cure of the second kind.
The cause is that in a man who has a physician in the lacrimal duct of the eye, and you extract it from another part, then the grays of the eyebrow are cured, and it does not accumulate in the hollow of the nose.
When I extracted another sage from a Jew who had it in his gray matter, the eyelid was pulled down, and the sage was already hidden and not found except for a small extremity that adhered to the eye socket, and it was a great sage of the sharp sages of the Turks, with a leopard's claw in which there were no pearls.
And the Senate is the Jew, and it did not happen to the eye socket badly.
And I extracted another sage from a man Crestian who had it in the groin, and it was an Arab sage, and that was the one with the pearls; and then I inserted it between those guides, and it was already submerged in the groin of him; and then I softened it there, and extracted it, and cured the Crestian.
And I extracted another sage from a man who had it in the stomach, and thought that it was for that; and then, because I passed three hundred days and did not change anything about it due to its dispositions, I inserted it over the sage and operated on it, and cured him, and it did not happen to that accident.
When you see a man who has a spear in his back, and the wound is closed and swollen, and it has been a week and a half, and the spearhead is still in the thigh, then you should remove it.
When you see a woman who has a spear in her abdomen, and the wound is closed and solidified, and it has not moved from its original position, and the woman does not have any problems in any of her natural functions, then you should remove it.
When you see another man who has a spear in his face, and the wound is closed and solidified, and the spearhead is not moving, and there is no pain here, and it seems that he is fine with this.
When you remove the spear from the man of the princes of the king who had it in the left side of his nose and had declined to the right part of a small piece, and the entire spearhead was hidden.
And you were called to the care of the man in three days for the wound of the spearhead that had entered.
And then you removed the wound of the spearhead with great effort; and then you asked that woman subtly, and did not feel it; but you felt the point at the end of the spearhead, and then you wondered if that point was at the tip of the spear.
And I will make the place where it is most attractive and digestive, ensuring that this place supports my appearance as the location of the sage, so that it passes over that.
When no accident occurs in the location where you have successfully achieved that place; and you continue to apply pressure over it for several days and no accident occurs; and the plague becomes consolidated, and the hernia of the extremity of the thigh is held in place by the space for several days until one day the surgeon notices that the patient's leg is painful and returns to me.
And then you continue to apply the acute, corrosive medicine for several days until it burns, and you touch that, and you remove the intestine, and you tighten the extremity of the hernia, which adheres to the fist.
And you adjust the incision of the plague with that acute medicine until the extremity of the hernia is visible, and it passes my time for several months within the space of four months.
And then you push the focus of the plague, and it is possible to enter the forceps into it, and you maintain that, and you do not obstruct the cessation, and you continue to subtly and inventively apply it over those with the engine, when one day you began to use forceps to remove it from the focus of the capillary, according to the form of those in the end of the capillary, and you extracted it; and you restored that plague.
When the doctors found that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the plague is consolidated, and the whole body becomes healthy, and does not return to its former state for any cause.
I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some sages for which you pause this rule and its significance about it that I have not said, four parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood by me in narration nor do I understand those free.
And the inventors of this art compare less about motion; and I think that this is present about what is absent; and the new operation is novel and the novel instrument must be the descent of the strange causes of the art when it happens.
And you say that sages are not outside the members in which they are fixed only by two hands: either by attraction of the place where it is inserted, or by the contrary of another part.
And that which is gripped by the place where it is inserted, or is a sage proceeding in flesh and is gripped and released.
If the swelling does not subside by the hour in which the cat is caught, you should lay it down for several days until the flesh that surrounds it is healed and the attraction of the cat is relieved.
If it seems that the swelling has settled in the bone and does not subside by your inspection, you should lay it down for several days and reinspect it every day, and it will eventually be cured.
If the swelling does not subside by your inspection in several days, you should make a hole in the circuit of the saucepan around that bone part and extract it, and it will be cured.
If the scar has already been banned in the location of the chest, and is banned from sentiment, you should inquire about that am, and if you feel it, you should attack that am with the most convenient stitches for the treatment of the leg.
And if you cannot reach it due to the restriction of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins here, you should proceed with the plague when it is amplified and it is possible to extract the scar.
And if it is held by the heels that are held, you should cut the flesh in which it is fixed from total part; and pay attention to this, if you cannot escape the flesh in the fracture of the heels and in the twist of those that obey.
When you are performing the extraction of the gallbladder in any location where it is, use your own twist of the forceps at all parts that pass through the sageta; and carefully at subtlety that the gallbladder is not torn and is flat at your difficult attraction of the gallbladder and the extraction.
And if you cannot do that about the gallbladder of your time, use your hand for several days after the parts that are in the circuit of the gallbladder, and proceed to that which you will be able to do. If you are in opposition to the flow of the blood, use what has been said for the cure in the capital city.
And guard your virtue of incision of the vein or of the nerves, or of the cord, and administer anesthesia in all parts of your possible to the escape of the gallbladder; and do what is easy and calm and slow and firm as you and your prescribed.
And if you make the gallbladder contract so that the thigh is second to the figure second to the one that you must focus on the pain of the gallbladder in it, which is less useful. If this is not possible for you, then administer this remedy as best as you can using the figures.
If the sutures that are outside the opposite part are cut by the contrary of another part, or if any part has already undergone treatment on another part, or if there is concern about the extrusion of the suture due to the feeling of the part pressed against the previous one and sometimes to that eminent; then you should cut over that; and the incision should be according to the quantity that was grasped by the forceps; and then attract it, so that it is slightly pressed into the cessation.
If it is held in the bone, then you should twist the suture according to the opposite direction as the suture presses on the bone, and increase the force, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for a few days, and repeat it as needed.
If the end of the suture is in that, then you should press on that with your hand.
If the end is cut and you want to administer compression, then you should insert and that suture, if it is narrow, straighten it by hand so that it fits between the concavity of the bone and the concave side of the suture and then press on that with your hand.
If the belly is hollow, then you should press on that side with a strong force, so that the belly sinks into that part.
If the belly is intoxicated, then you should make sure to hollow out the entire flesh where the liver is located, as much as possible, and apply cure to that part which is appropriate.
If the belly is caught in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the vesica, or in the side, and it is near that part where the pain is located, and you can easily reach it, then you should cut through that part, and hold onto it, and take out that part, and remove any veins or nerves that are near it, and put it back in, and if it is possible, cure that part as soon as it is healed.
Form of forceps used to hold the belly:
The ends of them are like the teeth of a saw, which are sharp when we hold onto the belly to prevent it from being cut.
And those are special movements, large and few or many, according to the size of the belly and the width of the pelvis, and the extent of the swelling, and the constriction of the intestine.
ayssi "how" as if it were "according to how" or "as follows." The rest of the line seems to be describing the process of removing an inguinal hernia by pushing it back into the abdominal cavity through an incision made in the groin.
This sentence translates to "Of varicose veins." However, without the context of the entire text, it's ch
This sentence translates to: "Of the veins subject to varicose veins, which are those that are most commonly treated with varicose vein surgery, such as those located in the neck, the two temporal arteries, and the two lacrimal veins of the two eyes, which are called aspirins; the vessel prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vessel located at the end of the nose; and dogs that are located in the collar, and the vessels located at the corner of the mouth, and the vessels located at the corner of the mouth; and — these are the veins that are called varicose veins —; and the veins that are located at the end of the tongue. When the veins that have been cut in the breasts are looked at, four of them are a cephalic vein, and it is necessary to use the wild rose; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is narrow, and it is a migraine vein, and it is composed of one branch from the basilica, and another branch from the cephalic vein; and that vein is called "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic garden, and it is called "citellar," and the common people call that the vein of the stomach; and the funis of the breast, and it is paused over the focus, and it is that one in which the fleubotomy is done, and it is that one which appears above the poutz for apparent manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between what is said to the ear and the little one said, and it is in those two branches.
And in the foot there are three veins; one of those is where the curvature of the domestic rose is left, and the second is sophena, and the location of it is where the domestic garden's camba is, and the sciatic vein, and its location is where the domestic rose's camba is, and in the camba there are other venas similar to those.
The cause of the swelling of the veins that are nearest to the ankles is catarrh of the ancient kind, and emigration and ulcers of the old, unhealthy cap.
E la qualità di sagginare quelle è secondo che tu mi consigli a te: è che sia ras il cap del malaute, e sia freguat il cap del malaute nel occipito nel luogo delle venie ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha la malaute la siu col am una benda entro che apparen le doas e le locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en due luoi premegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am il tuo dit, e se tu senti i pols di quelle am il tuo dit tuo, qui senha am tenta.
When you take hold of the scalpel and that which it is incident upon, and then introduce that point into the vein within which the flap will meet the bone, you have to be very careful not to cut too deeply. And then raise the vein and the coda up to its parts, and insert the vein into the incision made earlier. And is the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers' width or less, and it should be made as short as possible.
And then apply pressure with your thumbs and hold that within until it is healed.
And before the end of the free incision, make the cauterization of those and their parts.
Most of the arteries are venous veins that serve as the support for the flap cutting, and they are old and unhealthy, and frequently infected with sharp-edged, excessive exudates in the edges.
And the quality of the flap cutting those is second to what I recommend to you: tighten the thigh, so that you can feel the arteries when they appear with a clear sensation and demonstrate the tips of their parts, and then you should try to hit them.
And when you raise the codena over the vein of the parts where the aforementioned indicator is located, and insert the fleubotomi incision here, and raise the vein in its place; and insert it according to the quantity of your necessity in the other veins.
And when you remove the abscess of the thigh, and place the aforementioned indicator on the vein for an hour, and place it over that cloth and powder and tighten that which is under great constraint, and leave it within until it is cured.
And before the memory of them and those who have been incised, and the attraction at the beginning of freedom,
And the benefit of fleubotomy on the vein of the front is that the fleubotomy of the cephalica is for the old wounds of the face and for emigrants and rogors and uncared-for ulcers.
And the quality of the fleubotomy of you is according to what you recommend to me; so it is that the abscess stretches the collar around which the vein appears; and hold the instrument that is named fossor of which this is the form of you:
Pause the point that is on the top of the fossa over the vein and cover it with something, whether it is a penny or another cause in the hand of the patient, and leave it to run according to the quantity that you want; and remove the puncture from the thigh and tighten that which is healed.
If some incisions are made, it is better to make them with a sharp edge, but do not cover the incision so that it does not have the sharp extremity of the others, and the incision should be made on the side of the transversal, where the bones are placed and the knife can easily cut through the flesh of the incision when it is subtle.
The two veins that are in the tear ducts of two eyes for scabies of the eyes and sclera, and the maladies of the face.
The quality of the incision is that the thigh stretches the collar, and the incisions are made on those, and you should stand over the head of the patient.
If the incision is subtle, it is better to make it on the side of the transversal a little long, where there is no flesh; and if the incisions are subtle, then the end of the flesh is cut.
And if you wish to run the course of the humor as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those points, and stretch them with a new one, and then remove them.
Many of the varices of the nose are attributed to acute fever and severe sweating, as well as to the diseases of the face, such as boils and rashes that occur in the face, and most importantly when it is old.
The quality of the varicose vein is that it stretches the waist and brings the nose closer to the left side of the face, and holds the varices subtly long and places them in the middle of the cap of the nose, second rectitude, where the vein does not appear at the sensation here, and where the humor begins to flow so much.
Cover that you have recently made the varices small by small and run them according to your need; and then place it on that part with a new one, where it is restored more gently.
Many of the benefits of varicose veins guide the constriction of alcohol and the beginning of leprosy, as well as the onset of skin diseases, such as mothes and wounds, and corrosive ulcers, like herpes.
The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that the thigh stretches out on either side; and the surgeons should be over the knee, and the patient should be placed on a bed.
The fleebotomy should be made in the length of the thigh that is affected, and a small incision should be made at a time or another according to the need; and it should give the appearance of another vein.
The thigh should be loosened and the veins in the tight area should be stretched, so that the patient does not become frenzied, and the wound should be entered when the plague is cured.
The advantage of the fleebotomy of the veins is that it reduces small apothecary shops and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and the bad ulcers in the nose and throat.
The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that it reduces the pain in the patient, and tightens the thigh of the patient with a bend, and turns the lips of the patient and looks at the veins of which one is on the left side of the lip and the other on the right; and the demonstration of each is by the nail of each tooth, and it is less in the circuit of those dark veins; and then insert each in a scarlet scar.
If you doubt further, and do not know which of those it is, then you should understand the signs of the majority of them, and the manifestation of that one.
And make the appearance of the veins seem to be in the lips of those.
If there are fewer veins in the tongue, which is the best indication for cefalocele of the head, uvular malformation, and malformations of the mouth.
And the quality of flebotomy is that it follows the throat between the most important parts of the soul, and raises the tongue up, and looks further at the tongue, of one vein of the lats and another vein of the lats, and the color of each one is darkening to black.
And do flebotomy to each one; and keep in mind that you do not end the veins of those before flebotomy, as they are arteries.
When the veins in your groin that have been previously opened are in the area where it is common for all men to have them, and the veinotomy on their legs is done with two forceps, or place am le fleubotomi mirtilat or olivar at subtlety declining; or else sec the fleubotomi cutellar, and call if alnessil, and this is the form of it:
This passage is discussing the anatomy of the body and the structure of certain organs. The text suggests that the latex of the body should be examined to determine the number of times it has been used, and that the veins should be opened if they are full and appear to be large, as they may contain blood clots. The text also mentions that some organs may have a larger size than others.
This passage is describing the method of "fleubotomi" as being less invasive and having a more precise exit point, and that it should be used for dividing veins that contain small amounts of subtle substances. The text suggests that this procedure should be performed with care to avoid causing any damage to the surrounding tissues.
This passage is discussing the benefits of the "fleubotomi" procedure on the basilica vein, which is one of the three main veins in the body. The text suggests that this procedure can help to remove toxins from the blood and improve the overall health of the body. The procedure involves cutting and dividing the vein to allow for better circulation and to prevent the buildup of harmful substances.
It is advised to the surgeon, when performing a flebotomy, that they take care to save that vein and keep it above the area where the flebotomy will be performed, and if they err and adjust the needle in the puncture of the flebotomy, they will rupture that artery and cause fluids to flow, so that they do not accidentally cut the vein during the flebotomy, they should carefully cut along the line.
If the basilica does not appear clearly, you should cover that and move to another place or encircle some ram around it; or if you perform the flebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible, and cut that above the flebotomy like they have said.
If you want to perform the flebotomy on the metheglin, you should cover the stricture of the arm that touches the location within which the location of the fingers is found, and place your hand over it as you please; and cut the arm and section the vein with a concave incision at the flebotomy site like they have said, and make sure that you cover the percussion for the space around the artery.
When you see, as you stretch the limb, inflammation occurs in the location that you have seen, and that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and then it swells.
If the blood flows in the fleurition of the arteria, and it is subtle rog, then you know that it is the sanc of the arteria; and you take and place your hand over it on that for long space; and after that leave the hand, and if the sanc escapes, four watches escape, then you strengthen the arm and let go of that.
You should guard the wound of the patient's foot, and place it over the thigh and do not remove it for several days until it is healed.
If the suture does not come out, and sometimes you are not present to give medicine as soon as it is needed, you should insert the artery if it appears; or at the extremity of the foot, and the suture comes out; or that takes an old stick, and flexes it, and holds one end on the location of the vein in stricture, and the other end over the pulsation for another day.
And if the suture comes out, it is; and otherwise, you cure that of which was preceded by the rememoration of the location of the powders that come out of the sutures.
And the removal of the suture is difficult in positions that are not suitable for the small location of the plague and the possibility of the pulse in the arm.
More often than not, the flebotomy of the dark vein is advantageous to remove the suture from the subincised head and the part below the chest; therefore, it is made up of the ram of the basilica and the ram of the cephalic vein, as they have said.
When the anesthesia is applied to that which is feared in the anesthesia of the patient, then it is a nerve; and if it adjusts in the puncture of the anesthesia and paralyzes the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it is difficult to cure the patient, and for most people it is not cured completely. And this nerve moves with the sensation; and if it is hidden in certain men and is subtle and not shown, then you cover the anesthesia with your hand that you use to hold the anesthesia with your own strength, and avoid the nerve with your own strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then you should find the vein along its length.
The advantage of the anesthesia of the cranial vein is that it relieves the pain of the head and alleviates the discomforts of the scalp.
And if you want to anesthetize the flesh of the ear or the flesh of the eye, then it is the same as anesthetizing any other part of the body; and all the veins are saved, and neither the artery nor the nerves are affected.
However, if the patient is very afraid when not performing the circumcision in the first impact, he will not notice it in the future.
The first of the patient is that you know that circumcision is not performed without the preservation of health and hope for the patient and caution from the risk of diseases, and that a fleabite circumcision in one of the veins that are in the thigh is: cephalic, black and basilic; and that a fleabite circumcision at the beginning of primavesera, over the descent in primavesera and autumn, and in winter when significant signs of repletion appear.
When there is joint pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This condition is called fleubotomy, and it should be treated on the third day or the first time it occurs, after three hours have passed since the pain started.
The more frequently gout is treated, the better the results will be, whether it causes convenience and necessity at that time, or on another day, in the same hour and at all times.
However, if gout has not been treated within fourteen years, and a woman has not been treated within the fourth month of the seventh month, and the elderly have not been treated within sixty years, they should be treated immediately.
And if anyone wishes to be treated for gout with any method, it is recommended that the intestines be cleaned before undergoing gout treatment, if they have not been engorged, so that the veins do not cause superfluity in the gout of the bowels, which are pure, and do not harm the main members.
And if the patients are not treated for gout with a nourishing and cleansing diet, nor are they dehydrated or depleted of energy within the same time period as the gout, nor is there any edema or abscess, nor is there any bad habit or excessive exercise, nor any cause that dissolves the virtue, or if the body or animal is not treated, then the gout should be treated with a nourishing and cleansing diet, and dehydration or depletion of energy within the same time period as the gout, and no edema or abscess, nor any bad habit or excessive exercise, nor any cause that dissolves the virtue.
And if you consider in subtleity of humors that are thus, if the gall is large, it is thin and bitter, and if medicines are available, then it is possible to use them for this purpose.
And if you enter in the bath if any cause does not prohibit it or is exercised by some exercise for that gall to become subtle.
And pause the fleebotomy of the gall in the chest, so it is time for third hour, as they have said.
And tell me what that chest is to be guarded in that day of all animal accidents, as they have said, with anguish, rage, fear, and all corporal accidents, as they work and pain is superfluous and cunning and deceptive as it appears to them.
And at its seizure, the causes are to be present in the use of the quality that people usually use for aromaticity and fragrance and for balms and semblances as follows, according to the number of possibilities.
And follow the fleebotomist on a cushion that is placed whether or not that cushion of the one who has to be fleebotomized.
And take the other arm, and make points on that side with the scalpel or three times; and stretch the limb and involve those points.
If the stricture is too tight, that is, if the stricture does not allow for passage or if it is an excessive tightening, then you are forbidden to give blood; or if it is a softening, and you are forbidden to give blood to the body.
Then, if the stricture is too loose, that is, if one who gives blood causes pain in the member between them when entering, and the veins are inflamed, and it is declared as such.
Then, if the blood-letter uses an ancient ointment quite a little; and then pauses the hand on the member over the vein, at that place where you want to do the blood-letting, so that the vein may be a little cut, and the percussion is set aside as much as possible of the veins which are thus stretched by the blood-letting, and of those which are full of wind and when you pause the blood-letting over the member you must also move the blood-letter; and the blood-letting does not cut the vein, and if it does cut, it is twisted.
And so, in order that this flesh-eating knife may be stopped and aroused in all of these causes.
When you have paused the dissection, if the vein is swollen in a vein, then do so; otherwise, you will continue to another vein further on that location or over it, if that location is not inflamed.
And if the location is inflamed, or the thigh is swollen, you should lay on it for a day or two, and do not strain the limbs, as they may become infected with gangrene, nor should you put them in water.
And if you continue the dissection if necessary.
And if the abscess is small and moves subtly, and you fear that it will not clear the amount you want, then continue the dissection in that direction with a straight line and adjust the incision a little, and if the location is inflamed, then make a few incisions on the affected part to clear the abscess.
And if the abscess has already become inflamed, then do not continue on it, as there is no cause for you to avoid it; and pause on that certain part of the needle, where the corset of the skin is released, and hold it with your hand. This is better in this place than oil and the others.
It seems that olive oil is better in all types of surgery, as it helps to prevent blood clots and reduces pain when the doctor presses on one of those areas over the location, making the sanc subtle and turning it around when it becomes large.
If in the location of the fleebotomy a large abscess is formed, where moving parts are affected, and mainly that which has not been bled except for that vein, or in the inflammation of the small vein, and you cut it, and place your hand over the location, soaking it in water and salt, a little scrubbed, and hold it for an hour, where it dissolves.
And cover that with this oil to properly close the wound of that vein, either by the same vein or another one.
If Roman comes to the location for several days with any black or green color, it is not noticed; and if you want, place your hand on that cause of aloe and dissolution, or any cause of sweat from the mentastre or calamite or semblant of the same.
When the visible movements of the postures and eminences are not enough, a surgical operation of the basilica is required.
And so, stop your work there and place your hand over that part, and if you tighten your compression over that area, that prominence is evil and bad; and then keep doing it until you find a reason for this that they have said, for sure the blood will flow from the artery sane.
And apply here what is sterilized, so that the place is endurant, and apply care to that with the other cure when it is cured.
E if you take out of the vein all that is needed from each man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that comes out of the vein, according to what appears.
And if the vein is black, you should take it out as soon as it appears to be red; and apparently, if it seems large, you should take it out as soon as it is subtle; and apparently, if it is sharp, as soon as the sharpness of it is gone.
And if you take out of the man who is large and strong and needs extraction of a vein, that the fleebotomy of the vein is amplified and the fleebotomy is flat.
When one is in a cold place, make the opposite of that, and cover it with troops visible, and let it straighten out.
The best way to administer venous phlebotomy is that the transverse section be made, not a puncture.
This maneuver of phlebotomy is saved from the flow of blood and the injury to the nerves, and it is praised and said to be a safe phlebotomy at that latitude and longitude.
And it is customary to occur spontaneously after the phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that of the phlebotomy with a small amount of an infusion of one milliliter or simple oximel; and extract from the sac in three or four veins.
And if there is a fever of the collection, then you take infusion from the phlebotomy in an earthenware pot or in an aromatic earthenware pot with specific aromas such as cinnamon, ginger, and similar scents, or in an aromatic earthenware pot with a pleasant odor.
If you encounter hernias, and it causes the swelling of the testicle, then take care to catch the urine in a bowl of warm water and apply something subtle to odor; and use aromaticity from some herb, and place the hand on the affected part.
And use other causes that have been said in the division of the head of hernias for evacuation.
And if you want to dissolve the hand and evacuate the testicle secondarily, take care of the one where the herniotomy was performed for the evacuation, and the virtue of it is freckled, which evacuates the testicle little by little, so it is according to the amount of virtue in the days that follow.
Many times you want to dissolve the hand and evacuate the testicle secondarily, and the hand is strong, then make the testicle leave that in about seven hours or nine days after the first herniotomy.
Many times you want to pull the testicle out of the hand against the direction of the incision, taking care that it happens on the second day or the third.
When the body is already scalded and sharp, and a fever sets in, which is a symptom of the saint's pain in one vein and a large amount of it, and the perception of the saint's pain is amplified throughout the area where it occurs without interruption, then you will have preserved all the conditions for flebotomy; and you must place your hand over the saint's chest, so that the body of the saint does not die in place of sinusitis, four veins are opened when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And if you do not know when to slide the arm and evacuate the saint's second vein, as the wound of the vein is closed and it is difficult for the saint to pass through, then you must press subtly under that with great force and curve your extension slightly, so that it is too much.
If the layssa is inside the flebotomy; or remains there at the acuteness of the flebotomy that coagulates in the wound of the vein; or presses over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and comprehends that compression more gently within which the saint is outside and suffering.
If the vein is inflamed, then you should avoid touching that area and let it be.
If it requires you to evacuate the sanction immediately, and there is no exception, then you should mark that location on that side or on the other arm with another vein.
The vein called "thigh vein" is incised in the location of the knee or the elbow, when it is not atrophied or wasted, and it is composed of those.
The quality of the flebotomy of that vein is that it introduces its hand into the animal's belly, and if the wound tightens around the limb and the vein appears clearly.
Then hold your strength over that animal, and perform the flebotomy according to the transverse cut, not laterally or according to the length.
If the wound is wide and your flebotomy is at that location over the joint of the arm, then you should flebotomize a little.
If the flow of the sanction is prohibited, then you should insert your hand into the animal's belly and let the sanction run in the animal as you can fulfill your need.
If you were in the summer days, you would be excused for the repetition of the water in the tail, and the more it pauses the heart's course in water, the better it is.
The first line of the text translates to: "And the safer way for this vein is that out of all the others, here it has no pulse nor nerve.
The first line of the text translates to: "And the surgery of the ankle of the big toe is called the diseases of the foot.
The quality of the liposuction of the patient is that you strengthen the leg or the thigh, because you have placed it in the groin, and if the vein is inflamed and is being demonstrated at the same time; and the liposuction is transverse; and if they are all inserted, this will not cause any harm to the patient.
When preserving the final part of your dissection, then remove the last layers of skin from the body parts you have exposed.
And if you do not iterate the sinus in the tail cavity and let it run along the artery, then the sinus will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when you extract the sinus according to the amount of necessity, then place your hand over the vein or vessel, so that it is not firmly consolidated; and it seems that you will have to do this in all cases.
The advantage of the dissection on that side of the patient's body is that it reveals the maladies of the table.
And do it in a similar way in the dissection of the other side as you have done in this one.
The advantage of the dissection of the vein is that it reveals the maladies that were in the part of the body that was exposed during the dissection, such as those found in the thighs, and the retention of menstrual blood, and the ulcers and old wounds of the buttocks and legs, and their resemblance to the maladies.
The quality of the fleshotomy is that it enters the limb into the watery cavity and covers the affected area where the veins appear; it is placed over the joint of the foot with a prick; and the location of the vein appears at the tip, which should be pointed towards the face of the foot with the toes pointing downwards.
Then, the fleshotomy of the pus is large or the cushion is placed further down the leg, where the prick should be added to the closure of the wound, which is better and allows for greater drainage.
If you fleshotomy on the face of the foot, pay attention to the nerves that are still present over the face of the foot, and stop your fleshotomy at the point where you wish to insert it, as if you were inserting it through the hole.
And if the fleshotomies are yours.
However, if the insertion of the sanction is prohibited, you should move the foot of the patient into the watery cavity and let the sanction run through the entrance where it is evacuated.
If the cautery erroneously hits the first vein, then repeat it on the same spot until the area is sore; and do not fear the malician, rather than guarding yourself from the nerves as they have said.
When it seems that the other foot has an erection.
If it is the sciatic nerve that causes pain, then you should remove the tail from the cavity of the wild part.
And the advantage of the flebotomy operation is that it can be done when there is pain in the ankle.
The quality of the flebotomy operation is that it quickly and firmly presses on the leg of the ankle within the thigh, and four or five needles are inserted under the skin at once with one long, thin needle, which does not hurt.
And when it appears, you should flebotomize that second vein that is closest to you and the second transverse, and it is better; or if you are not able to insert it, you can cut it with a scissors or cut it with a knife, and the place for the needle is sal.
And it is not uncommon for men to have it; and if you apply it there and do not feel anything, then you can flebotomize any part of the leg, and that which appears in the two feet of the ankle and the ear and the ring.
When you hold the nerves, and run the quantity that you need.
Then loosen the stricture and place your hand over the location of the herniotomy incision, which strengthens the location. The sooner it heals.
Of wind and the quality of its use.
Wind is of corn, or of ashes, or of eyes.
And wind is made by two methods: one of them is the scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is the winding itself.
And this winding that has its scarification is made by two methods: one of them is the focus or the focus.
And the winds that are administered by scarification and blood extraction are fourteen locations of the body, of which one is located at the place where the previous winds were placed, and the other part is the right side of the neck; and ventozacio of the right collarbone; and ventozacio of the mandible from the mouth; and ventozacio of two spatulas; and ventozacio of two candles; and ventozacio of two brasses; and ventozacio of two cavities; and ventozacio of two holes.
A surgical operation does not extract the poison unless it is taken from the tiny, spare veins in the flesh, and therefore does not cause harm to those; nor is it certain that a surgical operation is a type of focus or its focus in any other afflicted part for repletion after the whole body has been emptied.
When labor pains are caused by obstruction or continuance, administer the remedy at the beginning of the month and throughout the entire course of the month, and in the same place and at any time.
And when it happens in any cause of those, and truly if it is in the third or fourth month of the month, then you command that forceps be made to be passed every two or three hours.
When the windpipe of the neck is affected by gravity and descends into the chest, it is most likely an evacuation of the entire body.
This wind is in the location of craniotomy of the cephalic.
And it is not necessary to use that which is from the complex humor of the chest, or in the quality of catarrh, for that great benefit.
And therefore it is not necessary to use those in the warts on the face, and in the heads of those who have poor health.
I think that it is not necessary to continue on that, and therefore I advise the wind to pause its blow for a little while in the parts where you command, so that they do not fear the generation of oblivion.
Less ventilation of the alcohol is in the location of craniotomy of the dark vein and the basilar artery: and therefore it causes asthma, and the constriction of air and the division of the sternal angle of the air, and the throat, and the repletion.
When the wind is blocked in the ear, and if it is left as is, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
The wind of the cold humors causes pain in the face and throat, and migrates to the eyes, and causes headaches, and pains in the teeth; and it is in place of bodily cauterization of the bile ducts.
When you command the wind to not press its hand, but to scarify, so that the artery does not insert and causes a rush of blood.
The wind in the neck causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and a similarity to the diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in place of bodily cauterization of the external opening of the lips.
May the wind that is made on the lips cause caphatan, which is made by the repletion of heat.
And the wind that is made on the lips gives strength to the bodily cauterization of three veins, which are of the bile ducts, black and cephalic, so that those arteries supply all those veins with blood, and those small veins with blood from other veins that are largely entered when the attraction is on those three veins.
When the physician commands the surgeon not to proceed with a scarification, but to instead remove the flesh and nerves and arteries from the location.
It is a breeze that blows over the thighs and calves, causing hemorrhoids and pus-filled ulcers.
And command the surgeon to make a large breeze, one that is of air, and that requires a deep incision; and then use many small breezes and perform a scarification in scarification.
Many breezes are required for the manifestation of small changes, which reach the entire body, and alleviate old pains in the toes and heels, and in the vagina; and they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bothersomeness and distress; and they stand in location for flesh-cutting surgery on women's thighs, and calves, and on other parts.
In the end, all of the body is deflated, and they make incisions in the flesh of men.
And the relief of the breezes is directed to the relief of the breezes in the thighs and calves.
The quality of the position of the vents is that it pauses the vent in the beginning and continues until properly timed, and does not prolong the position of the vents, less pauses those slightly, and returns them to their original state, and that the humors arrive at the location through the advancement of the gullet. When you do not cease to apply this and continue to enter until you see the wound already swollen and inflamed, and the pain of the gallstone appears.
And you should carefully remove and repeat the small pieces a few times, and consider in the position of the body.
Fourth, that person who has flesh of rare meats, cover that you remove a piece and not push it, so the place is not ulcerated.
And order the wind to increase the cutting and spread a little, and then the removal is easier.
If in the wound it grows, you should cover that you remove several pieces, and in the first piece, you open the way of subtle incision to the wound and the clearness of the body. Less in the second by the examination of the obtained water from the removal of the large wound.
And if the wound is very foul, you should make a deep cut in the last piece so that it can dry.
Finally, when you want to extract the wound little by little or a small piece, it is enough for us one cut.
If you wish to extract a hardened sinew, make an incision with a sharp cut; and if we find that the sinew is large, then cover the wound with stitches made with a suture.
The term "scarification" in which the depth of the cut is determined.
If the skin is thick, hard, dark, and the wounds are large, then cover the wounds with poultices of olive oil, almond oil, or olive oil with cinnamon; if it is in the summer, use olive oil, olive oil for lavender, olive oil for chamomile, or olive oil for saffron, and follow those suggestions.
If the surplus is large, remove it, and use olive oil that is dark, olive oil for balsam, olive oil for aloe, or olive oil for aneth, and follow those suggestions.
If the ventilator is of large parts of fleshy tissue, then cover the wounds with poultices of oil, and follow these suggestions: make the locs of the ventilator as soft as possible, and if it is in the summer, use olive oil, olive oil for lavender, olive oil for chamomile, or olive oil for saffron, and follow those suggestions. If it is in winter, use olive oil, almond oil, or olive oil with cinnamon, and follow those suggestions.
When that of which the sanctuary is gout, wash your nostrils with warm water, or with alcohol and vinegar, and it will be suitable for those.
When that of which the superfluities are fatty, wash your nostrils with warm water, or with alcohol and vinegar, which is called majorana, or with decoction of anise, or with camomile, and it will be suitable for them.
And cover the nostrils with a cloth; there are some that are maintained in place by soaking them for an hour or for several hours, and some that sleep with the cloth on their nose.
What should be done to prepare the nostrils before phlebotomy?
Consider that at the beginning: if the person who will perform the nasal device or who will perform phlebotomy has a hot temperament and feels agitated and inflamed, then you should take cold causes, such as milk vinegar, and place them on the agreeable and sweaty parts of the face, as well as on the neck and shoulders, and also on the cheeks.
When they pause their walks as they can, and the servants of the vassals, and the tightened bands, and they seem to them.
Of that which is the cause of the collection, it is necessary to take in hand and pour on the belly or the belly of the scrotum, or the scrotum of the anus, and some sumac, and smell a strong odor between viel and noel; and that he be commanded to use little beer and food, and stop the walks of the patient's legs and canabir and pissers and small birds and columbine.
And it is necessary to take care that in the day of ventozacio and fleubotomia the belly is greater than the walk.
And it is necessary to give in the belly in some hours to Tyran homes tyriaca alpharac, or medicaments of muscle, so that the muscle is not damaged, or by the ventozacio or by fleubotomia or prop, so that the main members be comfortable and that the wound be subdued; and it does not matter if they take that scalfatz.
When the wounds that were made are windwaxes that have paused their flesh, and over the shoulder and gout, and the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the thigh, these members did not suffer scarification on themselves.
And it is not sought for that attraction of the member, as if they pause windwaxes over the breast in the flow of the sacred sac of the navel; and they use that way which is dissolved windwaxes free from the member, as if they pause over the belly and the umbilicus; then that rarefied member and scalp it and ram it down the pain that resolves windwax.
And if they have paused over the buttocks when they happened in their impurity or dryness, then by virtue of strong attraction for the beautiful ass and eradicate the dryness from that place.
And apparently, when they have paused over the foot and the shoulder windwaxes are needed in those closed ones.
And these windwaxes are administered with great care, and some are administered with fire.
When some waters are administered full of water in the meals of the mares.
And it is because the wind is filled and is pushed out and is water alone or water in which certain herbs are convenient for water.
The form of the ventage administered in the face: it is the width of the orifice of two thirds, according to what we have formed; and the quantity of the preon is the greatest of a palm; and it is in the lower part of the head, in the location where it is in the circuit, the thickness of the head, the traunc is small second according to the quantity that enters into the head a drop.
It is necessary that the pain of the ear be caused by hot or bitter things, with large margins, lion, and thick perse, such that it does not lead the member to its position over it.
And if at the side of the meal of the earring or of iron, where candle is placed over the fire,
And this wind is greater than that which has been recommended; and the little more of that according to the meals and the state of that who uses it from that.
When the winds of the falangs and extinguished others than those of the young men and large bellies.
The quality of pausing this draught is that it extends the heat of the wooden fire gently, and then places it on the vertex of the thigh transverse in the thigh's location of the draught, so that the fire is lit around the area to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
And if it is placed on the member of the patient, and it is said that it is over the wounds, then when you have the draughts and do not indicate that they are over and that the vapor is on that wound, then the draught will be too dissolved.
And then you light the fire according to your own will, and if you indicate that you have done so, then do so.
The fewer the draughts that are administered to the patient of pleurisy, the better, in water, where there is no transverse and vertex, and it is only filled with water, and is placed on the member only.
This is the form of the draught: And this draught, the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language
This line seems to be discussing the administration of bloodletting in certain body parts. It states that bloodletting is only performed on members where there is no possibility of positioning fans (or perhaps "winds" as referred to in the original text), due to the smallness of those members. It then mentions that it can be done on denuded skin, such as the nose, where it may resemble the semblantz (a term that could refer to a type of wound or scar).
When it comes to the quality of using those that if you have found bloody discharges in the wounds of cleansed wounds,
When the patient is in bed, lying on their back, and feels hungry but has no cause for it in their stomach, and their belly is evacuated through the abdominal incision and the vent, and their thighs are flayed as they lie down, and their hands are placed over them.
And when they are swollen and the case is clear.
And if it is possible to suck the area with wind, it will be less painful in the future.
Otherwise, wash the area with water that is agreeable and moves easily; and it should be flayed and expressed.
If the stomach of the patient is prolonged and the pain from the blood clots remains, then you should put a damp cloth in water and place it over the area until the congealed part is absorbed.
If the patient's stomach multiplies, you should powder vitriol or similar substances on the affected part before it ruptures; or their hands are placed over the area with the nails of the fingers that have been separated from the location, and the hand is laid down when the fingers adhere to the location, and the stomach ruptures.
If necessary, perform bloodletting, if it is possible to change those.
If bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then do flay the location with a sharp object or insert a needle into the areas that are most sensitive to pain; and place your hand there, taking those when you feel any pain.
When you want to close, powder a little of aloe vera, salt, or charcoal, and close as much as possible.
Now begins the treatment of the third part: from restoration. This chapter is vital in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of broken and accidentally dislocated bones.
Oh, child, I advise you to study this chapter with caution, with the ignorance of the ancients and those who do not care about the freedom of the ancients and read only one letter.
And for this reason this manuscript of the scientists in our land is private; and you have not been obliged to do so at any time; and I have not admitted that afterwards, except by long study of the books of the ancients and understanding of those, within which I extracted the science of those.
And accordingly direct yourself to experiments and studies in the course of your life.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The first source sentence is not provided in the text you've given.
The first source sentence in the provided text is: "Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque. This is the first source sentence to translate:
The text is discussing the treatment of various types of injuries or dislocations in the body, specifically focusing on the feet and intestines. Here's a line-by-line translation:
And if the patient's stomach is empty of herbs and meat and vegetables, and I forbid fatty meat and overeating of food that fills the veins of the sinews, then it is safe to take cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the member.
When you return the patient's thighs to their original position, it is customary in this first course of treatment.
When the patient begins to feel better, it is important that the thighs are not covered with innutritious foods such as those rich in viscosity, such as wheat bread soaked in water, and beans, and peas, and pork rinds, and cheese, and fresh fruits, and vegetables, and eggs, and honey. In this first course of treatment, coagulation of the fracture is achieved with a mixture of wheat bread soaked in water and honey.
You know that bones become brittle in men and the elderly, and it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated by nature alone due to the dehydration of their limbs.
May nature adjust and envelop over the cut bones of any part, seeming like glue, which increases and strengthens that which adheres and contracts within it, which is conglutinated and linked, within which the fever and weakness of the body are brought, as if a fire at the beginning, within which no cause prohibits this from being one of its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to place the cushions of the thighs, which are heavy and viscous and large, as they have been said.
And you know that the types of fractures are different depending on the part of the body; a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the shoulder; and it seems that all other bones are different from each other.
And you remember the entire type of fracture, explained in the distinct part of the other.
The given text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The diversity of fractures in the bones is noted; there is a curved fracture and another that occurs in the head; some are fractures according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the ribs and pelvis and other parts are produced and not produced, as it is written in the pen when prepared to write, and a fracture and dislocation in the head, and a fissure fracture.
And for all the species, it is engaged or tormented in the restoration of the bone according to what was remembered in its distinct location.
Much pain from bone fracture. Therefore, bone fracture is known: it is stiffness of the bone, and of that prominence, and perceived by the sense, and so when you understand that am with your hand.
And when there is not stiffness of the bone apparent and not pain, you must touch with your hand when you touch the bone in movement and the thigh does not increase much pain, then there is no fracture.
The text describes a medical procedure where a tortuosity or small fissure in the body may be treated with cauterization, compression, and possibly medication. The specific medicine used is not mentioned. The procedure is performed on the affected area, and a stricture (narrowing) of the vessel may occur as part of the treatment.
The text suggests that there is a location where the arc (curve) does not split into two or another part, and no accidents occur in its passage through the entire part of the body. If there are any deviations from the normal course, it is necessary to correct them immediately, as they may lead to gout.
If gout occurs, it is necessary to treat it for several days until the gout ceases. Then, remove that second hand that you can lift and engage with your other hand.
The text suggests that the restoration of the affected part and the engagement of the second hand is done with a substance that comes from the bone where the accident occurred.
Then, hold that second hand that will be remembered by the rememoration of the accident.
If the bones of the knee are sagged, then you need to extend this cut member of two parts, if it is the thigh or the foot; or if the bone is small; or if several cords or one cord and the bone.
And if your position is that you hold the member in its place while it is being extended according to its natural figure, and if the parts of the member are stretched, then you must know how to return those tendons to their original positions one by one, as you can do in each of them.
And pay attention to your direction so that you do not hurt the patient's thigh with your operation or injury; and apply yourself to the second bone that is next to the other in better forms.
And at that time profitably touch your member with your hand, and if sometimes you find something different, correct it and straighten it according to the amount of your virtue.
And equally vehement extension and compression are needed, as if they were words made by idle hands that observed movements made by their own hands, or as if they were made by the contraction of the member, as they have seen in the operation of their own movements.
When the quality of the stricture of the quiet member is that which you recommend, because you know that different members are cut in their appearance and size and shape according to their type.
And of those that are small like the arm and says it is thin and resembles those, you should know that the covering is of a fine silk.
Few are those that have large members like the thigh or the chest, and they know that in those there is an envelope made of lace and hard, which the ligament connects the large member to the whole part of the stricture, in which there is no macula.
And when you begin, place your evacuation of equilibrium conveniently at that, over the location of that fracture in three or four layers of that member's membrane; and tighten your grip on a small part of the ligament.
And see if that is at the end of the pus point of the location of the fracture, and tighten your grip on a part that does not focus your stricture on the place of the fracture you have strengthened. When you have extended your hand a little into the location of the fracture and gradually soften the stricture, one by one, as you take hold of the location with a large part of your hand.
Then, take another tool and wrap the other hand around it over the location that you have covered with your first hand, and see if the envelopes at the edge further from the fracture; and this is your operation in the stricture of the envelope and in the softening of the second one that they have said in the first envelope.
Then, stop between the feathers of a lion or a cloak of the kind that covers the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it there is tortuosity; and if not, do not stop in it for any reason.
Then, stop on the other tool, and cover these envelopes gently as much as possible, if in the location there is no inflammation or post-cautery pain, and you should stop on it that causes the post-cautery pain and that also relieves the inflammation; and then leave it for a while; and you should hold on to it with your hands.
Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
The first source sentence to translate is: "However, the splint that is placed over that fracture should be thick and have a small one on the other fractures, and the length of the splint should be according to the member's size and thickness; and apply pressure on the splints as another bandage according to your first stricture; and make sure the bandage is gently according to what has been said about the stricture, and that it is your stricture according to the location of the fracture, and as the fracture lengthens, the stricture becomes tighter.
When the sons are large and coarse in their features and appearance, and they are few in number; and if the sons are large, then as you have seen in the operation of another doctor who stopped the threads while passing the sons of cords of the tort, and it is a great error when too much stricture is equal.
And if the sons are too small and not suitable, then you will not be able to recognize them for stricture, and there is no need for one to be between another.
And if the thighs are cut off by the ends of the stones at the stricture in those places, then you should pause there for a while, whether it is with leopard skin or wool, which does not cause injury to that part.
Some visible fractures are caused, and there are disruptions in the chain, and you will find in that part of the capital a singular incident.
And you know that all members are not straight in the first day; the cause is that the member, when it is large, does not come to rest on the stool for a few days or seven or more, according to your safety from the occurrence of cauterization.
This is the tool used by ancients for the splints they mended, which were placed over fractures and dislocations, as well as twists.
The splint, as repaired by ancient restorations, is convenient for complex and particularly for the thighs and buttocks, where it is placed without heat or pressure: and that is because you take powder from the flour, and the bone of the flour which you must make the movement of the mold in the sides of the flour.
And how that feels, but it is crucial that the album of the hoo does not cause discomfort or roughness, and instead uses that.
Another splint for fractures and dislocations: recipe of asafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of unguent, and migrach, which is made of milk salvage, of all dracs. x; of melted butter and aloe of drac. v; alochil of drac. xx; all the parts and joints and crackles and cribellates if the complexion of the thigh is scalped; and uses this splint, which has a good composition and restores the fractured bones gently, and confers peace to the homes.
This appears to be a recipe for a plaster or ointment used to alleviate pain from fractures and twists. Here's a possible translation:
1. All of them are divided into thirteen parts in a mortar made of mottled earth, and they are polished, and they are refined with water or albumin of hooves and are administered.
When treating joint pain and separating bones from their locations, and addressing pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: Take a clean cloth and dip it in cold water with oil of wormwood, and place it over the area.
However, this ointment is not suitable for restoration, but rather for reducing inflammation and expelling pain immediately.
Another ointment for repairing cuts: take some fig tree oil and poppy seed oil; mix them together and make a ointment with them.
A ointment for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the inflammation of apopathy: mix together aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of ers, all parts of the plant, and all parts are to be taken and applied, unless the member is scalded.
However, if the member is scalded, then cool it with water or cold water and use it.
Another ointment for quick relief that this first one does not provide when severe apopathy occurs and the member needs to be restored: mix together aloe, semen of li, balsam, mallow, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all parts of the plant, and all parts are to be taken and applied, with water or cold water, depending on the quality of the member and the color of the skin.
This is a medieval medical treatise written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text discusses various medical procedures and treatments. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
In the region of Gualia, it was observed that there were cushions over the member torn from its restoration and the causes in which it dried out due to lack of heat, as well as resemblance to those causes that have been recommended.
Making a plaster that soothes injury and pain: recipe made of wax, feathers, hairs of swine or piglet, and aloe vera, and salt, divided into equal parts; they are pressed and rubbed, and the plaster is applied.
In the amount second to that which covers the limb, it is considered if there is no pain, no excitement, and the bone is not broken, then it is not necessary to remove the dressing from that place. However, if you consider that there is pain, excitement, or the bone is broken, then you must remove the dressing from that place. And if pain or excitement is felt at the location, then you must quickly remove it or cut it off, and take away the plaster from there.
And take some of the patient's sweat and wet sea water, and submerge it in warm water, and let it lave the place where the pain and excitement cease; and then wrap the member with a piece of cloth that has been soaked in warm water; and put on the linen that is submerged in vinegar and olive oil, and wrap it around the member; and make sure there is no allergic reaction to the cautery, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and the pain will be relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.
If ever the testicle or the scrotum becomes inflamed and painful, and all other symptoms are similar to this, and you are advised to apply a plaster and constrict it, then do as you have done at the beginning of the incision.
If no harm occurs to the member from any of those causes that have been said, then do not remove it for less than three days or four or seven; and some heal completely in twenty days after you have removed it, as they have said, as soon as the fracture has healed, and it settles into the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And adjust the constriction less than in your first tightening, and reduce the swelling of the patient's thigh, according to what is preceded by the remorse of the pain.
If ever the place of the fracture has dried and become less extensive than before, you should know that this nutrient is forbidden to reach that; and therefore, embrocate that with whey from all parts that were on that, and it will be completely cured in three days; and then tighten the constriction a little, and for this operation feed the member with nutrients, and it becomes healthy.
When a doctor performs a reduction for a fracture of another limb that was not reduced at the beginning, if it is covered, and is subsequently reduced according to the tortuosity, it is an error in the operation of their hands, and there is great fear, and if it is done correctly, the Antics will be in their proper places and will feel good about the work done by the doctor.
When I have not seen any of them perform this, it is reasonable that they do not know how to do it.
Chapter second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The kinds of fractures are blows, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct: four types of fractures one is caused by percussion of the skull, and the percussion comes from all the bones entering into the cranium, which we remove from the skull as we do in the shoulder, and for this reason this kind is called decompression; or the bone pierces a part of the bone, and pierces the flesh and does not pass through the piercing to the other side; and this kind of fracture is called complete separation.
And the plague of these kinds of fractures is great or little, and of fractures that are caused or spontaneous; and the cause of them is percussion or burning over the bone, and they seem to be like this.
And this fracture is called penetrating that has been brought near to the plateau which we remove from the skull; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these kinds of fractures is great or little.
When a fracture occurs in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair petite, and therefore this special capillary fracture is called.
This is a fracture that is caused by compression or percussion of the bone and appears to be, which enters any layer of the bone in the parts of the fingers, and is caused in the concave location as accidences of the payroles of eram when they are subjected to percussion and are parted from their parts of the fingers.
And this is truly caused in the bones of the human humors, as those that are like caps of eggs.
And all these species of fractures are separated by parts as stars are separated. And you will find am reremoracio of all this in its place.
And all these species of fractures can be detected by detection over those and by inquiry into their attempts and other parts of rotten flesh that are on them.
And a special capillary is identified by what is discovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it is limited on the attempt of the part, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fracture, at the beginning are considered the accidents of the leg, and you should pay attention to the accidents that signify by their meaning over the patient, such as vomiting of color, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of vote, and sincopi, and acute fever, and edema of the extremities, and signs similar to those in more serious cases, and the doctor's treatment is not effective.
If you ever encounter an unexpected situation, you should begin the patient's treatment immediately.
The cause of this problem is that it came to you with the symptoms as they were and has been getting worse over the past few days, so you should study the bone of the leg on the day of the 14th day in the first position.
And if it is in the summer days, you should study that you sit on the bone of the leg on the 7th day, having to do with whether the bone is corrupted by the panniculus and that accidents may occur that have been reported.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is divided into small parts and torn apart, you should study that the division is contaminated and torn, according to what you have recommended to me.
And is that you examine the foot of the patient who is suffering, and uncover the bone according to the usual method and carefully after the figure of the disease, and that it be less about the foot.
And if you have an accident in the bone, you must detect the flow of blood or aphosis caut, and you should oppose it to what you have covered, and it is that you put infusions of draps in the vein and olive oil on the rose, and you must stop the disease entering when it is sedated by the aphosis, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and you should start in the circuit of the bone and in the ablation of the.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; and this is the form of it:
When the surgeon has prepared the incision site, he should use the second instrument.
You need several types of scalpels, each with a different width and edge; and their edges should be sharp and pointed at the end, and they can be made of iron or steel.
Use them with ease by striking them on the scalpel to avoid damaging the head and causing pain.
If the bones are hard and thick, it is best to make small incisions along the course of the tendon before administering the scalpels, which are called non-penetrating tarsals.
I do not name them otherwise but four, those that do not stop at the end of the bone, for if they touch the test, they can cause pain and make the head of the nail resemble a small circle or margin, which is forbidden to be submerged and to pass through the thickness of the bone.
It is best to choose a large number of these tarsals that are suitable for the spine of each bone, as long as the head of the extremity is sharp and agile, and the quantity in length and brevity is second to the quantity of spine of this bone.
This is the form of three kinds of teravels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the cut bone is that you place the teravel on the bone and revolve it around that as you know if the bone has already been penetrated; and then pause the teravel at another location, and place it there where it enters the entire amount of the grosseza of the ray or envelops it.
When it comes to cutting into the bone that is between any joint of the bone, and making a small hole that you can use to apply pressure to prevent it from moving, as they have said, entering if you radiate the bone, or am your own hand, or am another cause for those sturments which would appear at that place, as tweezers and fine forceps.
And be sure to guard that you do not touch any cause of the cipher with the knife.
And when you have perforated the bone with the knife and separated it from the cipher if continued on it, and extracted it, be sure that you do not cut or crush that in the hardness of the bone that is in the bone with another tool such as a knife, but rather make sure that you use a small hole and a small point like the others.
And if you encounter any part of the small bones and fragments, hold it at that point that you must do for the sturments; and there treat the infection of the liver and find out which ones have said.
The other hand of the operation is longer, about four feet long, which Galiardus describes and praises greatly; and this is the saying of the doctor: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the part where the bone of the location ends and the fracture is severe and manifest, when you will have discovered that part and will then place your hand further down at the end of this slow and gentle inscissori of which this is the form:
E es that the lenticular part is like a lion and does not cause any cause, and the acute part is in two latz avantz in length, as times; that the lenticular part should be adjusted to the cipher am the face of the acute part on the bone.
E aprop percuteys about the inscissori of a partida am a little malhet when all the bones are identified as easily as they revolve, and you should be sure of the pantoon that does not happen in the accident that you fear in this hand, and if the doctor14 was the fol of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleepy.
When something causes pain in the bone of the ankle in certain places of the bone, it will be noted that this is due to the doctor's intervention in the lenticular part of the ankle joint, and it will be easier to remove that which causes the harm and the pain.
If the fracture does not penetrate into the ankle joint, and that which is separated or remains in the bone is the face of the bone, and there are sharp and subtle roughness on it, you can recognize that asperity and eradicate those subtle roughnesses with sharp razors according to the number you have prepared for various quantities so that you can possibly administer those in all places with convenient pus and the pus of the second part after you lose your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And recognize that you administer in your razor with the one that cuts the bone at the beginning with the latent pus of those razors, and use a part of the subtle pus of the bone, and do not stop giving until you reach the continuity of the pus and the subtle pus of all of them.
When in any of the smaller fractures or subtle breaks, follow the treatment you used for the one you lost in the correction of the bone.
And it is because not all have studied that art. And based on that, they have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is tight when you reduce the bone, then cover your hand with the next piece of cloth, submerge it in hot oil, and place it over the wound; and take another folded or tripled piece of cloth, submerge it in hot oil, and place it over the first one, and apply it to the part where you can without pressing on the bone, not too tightly; and administer to that limb, and do not strain it only by the amount of the plague.
And keep that to this cure for a day or two after you are sure of the stitch; and remove it and administer medicines as needed for superfluous dryness, such as linen and flour of errors, powder of ensember and aristogony, and decoctions of those.
It is necessary to make these powders from this powder and spread them over the skin, as they should be dry; and generally, they are administered in the entire medicine of the property of which it does not cause harm or toxicity.
And keep in mind that the plague in your cure is not net; and it should not be in its surdity of engaging or another; nor should virulence be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, corrupts that and pours on the thigh, and causes damage to the malignant evil.
And damages in the crown of the head, as the skull is shaped by the bones and most importantly when the cure of the head is administered, and darkens on its surface; and therefore consider that if damages are found in the thigh, you know that it is due to all its parts.
And if there is no darkening but from the medicine that was placed on top, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that causes the darkening, you should know that you take from honey a part and red oil parts iii, and apply those over the crown; and administer that to the curandum with the specifics of the cure that are suitable for when it is healed.
I apologize, but there seems to be no text provided for
This line translates to "Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not divided by bones but by soft tissue partitions, or one of those certain veins, according to which in you there are two bones, and the partition of the end is cartilaginous, and is not divided, nor does it cause pain in you, except for tightness and tortuosity and insufficiency.
If one of the soft tissue partitions of your nose is broken, you should know that you insert the small instrument into the affected part of the nose and close the fracture at the top of the indicated point, and at the deformed point, return the nose to its natural shape. And it is done by you for ease, and keep in mind that you do not close for that operation on the thighs of them.
If the fracture is in the upper partition of the nose and it does not pass through it, you should know that it should be equal at its extremity.
If the fracture is in several parts, you should make it appear like that.
And I advise you of the restoration of the nose in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and otherwise, know that you need to cut the nail of the middle finger an eighth of an inch and reattach the cauterized part.
When entering the end of the nose, a cloth is inserted into it, if the fracture is in one piece, or threads are sewn, if the fracture is in several pieces, and as much as possible is sewn to fill the nostril.
In ancient restoration methods, the bones were wrapped in linen and moved throughout the day, but I have not seen this for myself; having heard that the cloth is wrapped in a layer of powder like flour; and then it is placed inside when the bone is fixed and the cartilage is endurable.
Some people have something inside the nose, instead of a gauze, because it is wrapped in a piece of leather; and this is because you have fractured the nasal bone with great force, and the throat is not restricted for breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, make gauzes.
And if another gauze is pushed into the nose, apply it to the nostril or the corner of the mouth, or apply it with a damp cloth, or apply it with a wet cloth.
If there is no occurrence of strabismus, then you should cover that deformed part with flour and powdered essence of ensel, and place your hand over the affected area, and do not lie on it for any cause.
If the bones of the nose are broken or fractured, then you should cut through them, and take out those parts that are suitable for those; and then close the incision, and care for that part with what is appropriate for that, and apply plasters that are convenient for that.
And if there is an abscess in the nose, then you should cut that part and care for it with what is appropriate for that, and administer intravenous solutions of water throughout as much as possible.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, observe if the fracture is deformed only, and is not cut into two parts and is curved in the parts of the teeth, then your diagnosis is correct.
If the fracture is in the lateral part of the leg, then you should introduce the left indicator into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the medial part of the mandible, then you should introduce the right indicator into the mouth of the patient; and gently press on that to facilitate the healing of the fracture parts, which are adjacent to your other hand's part of the bone; that is, it is equal to those.
If the mandible fracture has already been separated into parts, then you should cover that you are administering extensions of parts in a straight line as soon as possible to achieve alignment.
If you have an accident that disrupts the teeth, then you should strengthen those of which you suspect are made of gold or silver or lead; and place your hand on the disrupted mandible, and place your hand on the double drap, and place your hand on the large gaping wound decently far from the mandible, or a piece of cloth tied at the length of the mandible, according to what you have prepared for the application, before it is destroyed.
When the physician commands the patient to rest and be quiet, and to stop eating the foods that cause lethargy.
If you suspect that the figure has changed in any way, then you should touch it and observe it on the third day; and if you find that the change is different from what was expected, you should correct it with powder of molybdenum, album of horse, or flour of cinnamon, which you had used on the spot where the wound was, and stop over the leopard's skin.
And then apply and adjust the plaster to the wound, and do not change the position of the bone, and leave that until it is healed and strongens the fracture; four weeks later this fracture will be strained.
If another accidental wound occurs, then you should administer the medicine that has been given in the past to heal the wound, and keep that wound from being infected again.
If the fracture is infected, then you should consider if it is the bone that is separated or the soft tissue, and you should carefully examine those soft tissues to see what is best for them in the removal of those from the sturments.
If the wound of the plague is straight, you should enlarge it as much as possible according to the quantity of your need.
When you have finished stitching those wounds, and if they are not too large, then you can continue to the plague; otherwise, rest on one of the plasters that is suitable for this wound and covers it, so that when it is healed, you can remove it.
Capitol .v. is not a complete sentence or phrase,
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.
If the clavicle is broken in a direction opposite to the muscle, and this fracture is made in one of three ways.
If it is cut or separated, or if it is separated into two parts that do not have wounds, and this is easier to restore; or if it happens in the wounds, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is due to the plague.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is due to the plague, is that you must have two assistants, so that one holds the auxiliary and follows the cut clavicle, and the other extends the col to that part.
When the fracture is approached by the thighs, it is said that it is in the form of the second one, and it is not in its eminence or concavity.
If you ask for extension, it is necessary to have the thighs apart, using a cloth or wool pad, and it depends on the amount of your need; extend and lift the clavicle and stretch the cloth over the fissure that is in front of the fracture according to its form.
If you cannot pull the end of the clavicle to the desired position, it is because it has been bent at the shoulder; then make the thigh be bent over the shoulder, and place your hand on the muscle of the leg a coyssi larger in size.
The surgeon presses the muscle of the leg at the desired position, and if the furculum bone is elevated as it was in the preon, then correct the fracture and place it according to the thighs that you have.
If you feel pain from the clavicle and muscles, it is necessary to press on that area and remove those pains as much as possible.
If it is held in the bone, then you must make an incision in the skin of this one with one of the knives that you have already sharpened, because you have paused further back from the sternum that serves as the cipher; and the sternum is made of flint or iron, and this is the form of this one.
It seems to be the appearance of the cook, and this is the cavity of it; and its latitude should be according to this one that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
The length of it should be according to what you can possibly achieve in the operation; that there are extremities assisting as many times as possible, and one extremity will be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague that you have incised when you extracted the fat from the bone is wide, and it is certain of apoplexy, then you must adjust the lips of the plague with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear apoplexy, then you must fill the plague with cloths and powders according to the amount of the cut in the plague.
If a stroke occurs with cauterization, it is known that the skin turns red and becomes inflamed, and then it is placed on that spot.
E tot, that no be harm the pelvic bone; and for this reason that you see the labor each day, that when the limb is softened or when you have already made the pelvis more prominent, then you correct this and strengthen the ligament.
And then pause the patient's sleep on the chest of the patient, and pause further the pillow of the patient so that he/she can sleep comfortably on the pillow; for if it is elevated the assistant's hand of the patient on the neck of that one, and thus the fracture of the shoulder is raised to the level of the muscle; or if the arm of the patient is placed at the collarbone of that one.
And do not cut the tendon if it does not happen in the proper or accidental place, and enter within twelve days.
And if you have seen the face of the patient and it is appropriate, adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave when it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable in the month of twenty-eight days, and some are seen in other men's time in that month.
Chapter Six.
Of the restoration of shoulder fracture.
A spatula is cut in the place of the chest and not cut except for the margins.
When you cut the bone of the patient — and it is cut in the middle of the bone — and it is not recognized unless touched, then you should follow what the figure of the forced fracture tells you to prepare for the reduction and reduce that second figure to its natural position in the entire framework of the joint that is possible for you.
Then pause over the powder of fine albumen of blood and honey; and then pause on a double drap; and then pause on the table surface according to the quantity of the spatula either totally or a little less.
If the table is concave in the corners of the locations of the spatula, then you should engage that concavity with a leopard's tooth and allow the table to be equal.
And then stretch as much as possible with wet long hair under the constraint of the table and between which there is not a tight spot of the place.
And consider the limb in every day; and all watched that is softened, another watched and stretch the leg and make the table equal if it is tight of the place.
When the patient's leg is placed over the table, it means that the patient's leg is positioned so that one end is on the table and the other end is
After twenty days or twenty-five days, the spatula is restored.
Then, when this number is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you know certainly that it is of the bones from which the beginning was not confused nor its dissolution.
And if you proceed to the location of the knee joint and clean the area with a wet cloth, then you divide it over it, take it out, and follow what has been said in the fracture of the femur of sadacio de apostema caut if it happens here.
Chapter 7.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest some ribs are broken in the middle of the body and then bent; rather, the ends of the ribs that are not chipped and comminuted.
And of the accidents that occur when the rib is cut, it goes to the parts of the fingers and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, and heavy vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the cut bone and not hidden in the feeling.
The first source sentence to translate is:
Then place your hand over the plaster and stop, and stop pressing on the table's subtle surface of sauce or cilium and as it pleases in levitation, push that into the cloth; and then gently place your hand on the cut bone that is not rotten; and go along the ridge at the back of some veins, and tighten that restriction nicely; and consider the ridge throughout the hour, and when it is softened, tighten that.
And if it is necessary to provoke decay or pricking, pain, or apoplexy that occurs in that place, then cut and remove that and erase the plaster and correct what happens by the hand of curing; and reduce the plaster, sometimes to the face; and adjust the restriction within that is healthy.
Capital. Eighth.
Of restoration of the breasts when they are lacerated.
You know that a break of the breasts does not happen except in large locations where they are pulled by both sides; and from the ends of them, at the parting, it does not occur in those contractions but rather through those which have cartilage. When I recognize that the patient is not afraid of the feeling of the investigation by the doctor,
The restoration should be as follows as to bind the fracture with the third finger possible, entering that it is covered by the flesh, and then apply and press and tighten the broken bone to the splint if directed.
If the rib fracture is inclined towards the dentists' teeth, you will experience severe pain and puncture, as if pierced by a needle that has been squeezed, and for this to alleviate the difficulty in coughing, and throat pain, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the antidotes are already engineered in that way.
And they say that by covering with the flesh those vaginas of the thighs that generate inflammation and viscera, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture is driven to the parts that are deviated.
We might have this for that reason not to cause any harm in generating cauterization, if it does not happen; and if it does happen, you can help with that.
And they advised those who had paused due to wind and instead that some strength was needed; and it seemed like reasoning, but rather it is feared that the wind will direct its excess to the location due to weakness.
They advised them: cover that place with wool that has already been immersed in oil, and they should place powders between the backs when it is filled, which is the liaison that engulfs when it rolls around the second retraction; and they should properly care for the patient with food and medicine.
If the patient suffers from severe constriction and the doctors puncture the membrane, be careful with the patient, cover that place with something, discover the torn cost, and then put down the instrument that preserves the cipher, the remembrance of which precedes, and remove the bones easily, and extract it.
And if you adjust the lips of the plague, if it is large, apply ointment, and care for it with that when it is healed.
If you have an apoplexy, place your hand and pour powders into oil that is rose-colored and place over the area, and care for the patient with this so that it can be cured of the apoplexy.
When a person is lying down on the bed where they sleep, if they are ill, then it is necessary to take their pulse.
In the case of a fever, it is customary to make
Of the restoration of fractures of the spine of the two and of the neck.
Some cracks in the bones of the neck, and they turn towards the inside, and seemingly towards the spine of the back. And when you want to know if it is sick or not, consider that if you see the joints more softened and stupefied and dead and cannot make them move or extend or tighten them and when you press them with your fingers or puncture them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not sick, and in the cases of dispositions it is mortal.
And if you feel pain in the joints with your fingers or puncture, then you know that the nucleus of the bone is safe and that the illness does not need much care.
And if you see the spines of the neck resemble that and want to know if it is sick or not, consider the feet of the patient.
When you see that the pain has subsided, it is appropriate to apply the remedy that has been applied to those who have suffered from gout in the past, and when you touch the patient's shoulder, you will notice ventilation and perspiration of their body, and some veins are turned over on their shoulder and cannot urinate, you should know that it is fatal, and therefore not include it in the treatment of the patient.
If you do not find any cause for those, the cause is better and will provide relief.
The treatment of the patient is that you perforate at the seat of the acupuncture point that you place over the spine that is red or pink, or if it is hot; pause there for a while until the acupuncture point is sedated, and then some veins will open in the day that has passed.
And then pause one of the comforting plasters and exsits, and press on that with your hand; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not sleep on the part where pain occurs when it is healed.
If pain occurs, you must cover the sacrum or any cause that has been separated from it, and hold that os; and then adjust the lips of the plague, if it is large, with a sutura; and then treat that am alcu encarnatiu of the enguentz, when it is healed.
If the hip bone is cut, and the end of the thigh, you should cover that you enter the point of the left thigh in the anus, and tighten the cut bones with the other thigh as possible; and place your hand on the plaster and staple, if you need those, and stretch that.
If you feel cuts on that, you should put your hand over it, and remove that, and care for the wound with the following treatment before it is healed when it is cured.
Chapter 10.
Of restoring the waist.
The bones of the hips are so cut, and if they are cut, their fracture is not only a communication at the ends thereof and are inserted in the longitudinal and declining in the parts of the dentitions; and it causes pain in the buttocks and location and puncture, and the cushion is stunned when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it when it is over the fracture that is the figure of the hand.
If the fracture is at the end of the limb, simply, you should cover that second part with something that fits well and is adapted to the shape of your body.
If the fracture is in the lower leg or thigh, you should place the cushion on the patient's abdomen, entering it if it is prepared for your restoration of that fracture. And when you have covered that part, place something over the plaster, and place something over that piece of plaster or nail, and tighten it so that you do not fear puncture of the fracture or removal of the staple.
And cover the concavity as much as it holds that inside which presses the tightening on the other side, and command the abdomen to lie over the side or to uncover the opposite side.
If you accidentally cause cauterization, stop extending and treating the area until the cauterization is sated, and place something over it that is followed by that second part that precedes; and then return to the restoration of the patient and tighten that part as much as possible.
If it happens that the bones are cracked or broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol XI.
Of restoring the fracture of the helper.
Helper is that which is between the thigh and into the shoulder of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, you should restore the helper in one of two hands, among which the one that you hold is the one that has the most similar shape to this form:
And they are connected by two cords, and it is suspended from an elevated location.
And follow the leg over a bench; and it is placed outside the broken arm over the end that has come to the head of the leg in the location where the curve of the end is attached to the curvature of the fist.
And it is suspended over that cause, or the minister extends it to the parts outside; and the cauterizer and the fracture are in the same parts, if the fracture returns according to what is covered.
And the other hand is that it is placed over the cervical part and suspends the head of the arm with the cord of the leg; and it commands two ministers, one of whom holds that the fracture is broken in the parts most affected, and the other holds the elbow away from it; and they extend their part to their location.
If you want the extension to be pushed out, then apply pressure over the fracture of the limb and over the other limb, and thus extend the two parts of the limbs.
If the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then make sure that the other end of the limb is supported on the thigh and the other part of the fracture is held in place with a bandage.
If the fracture is close to the knee, then make sure that the limb is supported on that location and on the other part of the limb.
Tie the bandage as tightly as possible and adjust it according to the part that is covered and applied in a good way, then apply pressure if necessary to prevent hematoma cauterization.
If hematoma cauterization occurs, remove the bandage after seven days and place it back over the wet and red lana sutura that was applied before the hematoma occurred, then apply pressure.
The tool for applying pressure to the fracture is that you place plaster over the fracture and then wrap it with drap nau; then adjust the arm on the helper, and hold your hand on the inner side of the muscle.
You should pause the cloth and press on the assistant's arms so that the arm is in the right position, unless there is any cause for the broken bone.
And use belts.
And you should press on the fracture with that belt that is placed at the top and bottom of it, and between each belt, the latitude of the same, and its length according to the trenching added by three parts of the total part.
And press on the belts at the stricture that I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And your stricture at the location of the fracture should be straight. And when you stretch the fracture, it is the smaller stricture.
And if you sometimes consider the situation of the belts and the stricture as they have said in the hour when you restore the member to its usual position, then you should do that.
And if you fear apoplexy cauterization, then press the stricture and place the belts in the day that has been said.
And consider the limb for three days in total, so that it does not happen in the site of inflammation or swelling; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to the superfluity of stricture; and then correct everything according to what has been said.
If you are over concerned that there is no cause for this, do not let the ligament drip for more than three days or less.
And if his sleep is over the thighs, and the thighs are more over the stomach.
And place your hand over the complete lacing of wool engagement, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the cut member is not delayed or dissolved, or that the limb is softened, therefore correct everything according to your virtue.
And place the food of the patient according to the order that has been given, in such a way that the food is gentle at the beginning and becomes more rigid as it is swallowed; and you cover that the food of the patient is increased.
Fourthly, it is customary for the assistant and the patient's bed to be strong for forty days; and you cover that they are relaxed and are administered baths and medicines as those correct those.
If the fracture is long and narrow, you should not delay in applying the splint within a day or two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus; of these, one is small and the other is the one that rises up, and the other is large and the one that holds it from the small one from the beginning.
And if the larger humerus is only slightly cut, or the smaller one, and they are not broken, it is not necessary to intervene.
And if the smaller humerus is cut, you must restore the displacement of the elbow and the care of the patient is placed in someone else's hands.
And if the larger humerus is broken, the restoration of the displacement of the elbow is difficult and the care of the patient is difficult.
And it is difficult when the bones are only slightly cut.
Therefore, if the bone that is cut is the smaller humerus, it is convenient to consult the surgeon, and the restoration of the displacement of the elbow must be done with small extensions, as much as possible, until it is no longer engaged.
If the large fatty tissue is tight, then you should cover it with a wide cloth and apply a strong pressure.
If both fatty tissues are tight, then you should cover them with a wide cloth and apply a strong pressure to the area where the pain is located.
And cover the figure of the face with the restoration of the swelling and the extension of the stretched part over a cushion, and place the fingers of the face in the parts that others say, and the ear should be placed below the other words, and the thigh should be placed on a pillow.
And if there is a cushion under the leg to support it and prevent the thigh from becoming too tight.
And if the doctor extends the arm of the part that is pushed away from the shoulder or leg, and another doctor extends it in a similar manner.
And if the surgeon enlarges the holes that are made by the second best figure that can be made.
If in the bone's process there are cavities, then you should pierce the entire part in the same place as your virtue.
If you find in that separate area that the intestine is cut and not in your hope for the restoration of the patient, then you should act on it and leave that second hand behind which they have spoken of.
If the fracture is not healing well, and you have already made a similar capital, then take care of that one.
If an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with red oil and white wax, and it should be more specific and subtle than the others, and press the cloth over that abscess to make it subside; and then remove the wound and pause the prepared powder of clay from the oven, and put the stela on that fracture that is red and strong.
You know that the number of stones in the arm you saw in the major dispositions is not in a focus or in two foci.
And put your string over the location of the fracture that is strong and strong, and when fewer parts of the fracture or lower parts are removed, stop the string a little while it follows the rememoration of the beginning of the capital.
And the cloths that cover the fracture are soft and not hard or rough, and the one that is most suitable for it is the one that is the most subtle and coarse, as they have recommended.
This line can be translated as: "Consider the member and its ligament in proportion to the days. If any cause is encountered that requires rectification, then as promptly as possible, cover the part that was injured and insert it into the wet cloth until the pain ceases.
If the member does not contract after resting and returns to its former state, then return the stricture.
If the traction has already been softened and the bone has been made stronger and appears similar to those, then correct everything as much as possible with your own virtue.
And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive traction of the stricture, then cover that with a little and gradually increase it over time until the nourishment reaches that part, and then tighten it.
If the thigh does not encounter any cause of those that have been said, then do not cover that it is sliding within the next 20 days or around those areas.
And hang the thigh down with your own strength of movement, and make it sleep on the soft side.
You know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 62 days, or more, and then follows the arrangement of the complexes and the virtue.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
This line translates to: "In the treatment of a broken toe and nail.
You should know that at the tip of the finger and on the nails of the fingers, and not happen to them except visible movements.
And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the finger, you should know that the thigh follows the calf and denies the knee, and stop the finger over that extended area.
And if the surgeon extends the bones and the surgeon cuts those that are not good, it is a good congestion.
And you should know that if it does not happen after plastering and stopping, do not apply cauterization; and stop the place according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
If the sprain is in the fingers of the hand, and you make it look like hope for cloth, and command the thigh to hold that with its hand, the stronger the cloth the longer it will last.
And if the bandage is made of strong cloth, in which the cloth is lifted, because the hand is applied to the palm; and hold it according to what you know.
If the fracture is in the deformed parts, then cover that you pause on the other side of the part and place your hand on the palm to make it wider and drier; and pause the stricture, as it is rolled around the ring between the two limbs.
If you happen to break a bone of the nose, then if it is the tip that breaks, cover it with your hand and hold it firmly and lift it up to the palm of your hand so that the fracture is not damaged. If it is the bridge of the nose, then pause the small stricture as much as possible to elevate the fracture and not cause any harm.
If the fracture is in the other parts, then hold it as you do in that place, or in the ear, or in the anus, or in the ring, cover it with your hand and see which part is the one that is affected; or all of them are in a continuous line, and it is better; or pause on that small part, as they have said in the tip.
And consider, in your restoration, and at that time, the disposition of the cautery apostema and opposite — as in the second operation — I say that you cover when any cause happens to those, according to the story of the cautery.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you've provided is not in
I apologize, but the text you've provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a
I apologize, but the text you've provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken in Andorra, Spain, and parts of France. Here's a possible translation:
The restoration of the patient is made in such a way that one bandage is placed over the fracture and another further down the fracture, and the thigh is prostrated over the patient's belly and face.
The surgeon extends the bandage all the way to its end according to the quality of the bone in which the fracture occurs.
If it is necessary to extend the bandage to the neck of the femur, then place the bandage directly on the bone, and the other bandage continues down to the fracture.
If the trepanation is directed towards the bone, then place the bandage directly on the bone, and the extension is made to the parts further down.
And if the surgeon engages the bone as much as possible within the limits of the joint, reducing it according to the similarity of the natural joint and the bone is united in good union; then apply plaster and stricture, unless it causes pain in the affected member. If pain occurs in the affected member, then remove that part within the days following when the apostem becomes soft, and return to your care.
The stricture of his side pain: cover that covers over the fracture a hard needle, bend to two or three veins, and remain over the superfluity; and cover that comes out at the ankle and the tip of the thigh.
And insert a long fish between the thigh and the part of the denol that comes out at the points, and the ends of the fish come out from the pus-filled parts of the parts, and turn it over the camba and the thigh as much as the superfluity does from the needle.
And place your hand over the thigh at the location of that asthenic fracture, and place one stone over the bones of the camba.
And fill the spaces between the camba and the thigh with more cloths, so that the traction is coagulated.
And begin the stricture with a strong bandage over the location of the fracture at three or four folds, and as you lessen the distance from the location of the fracture, your stricture will be smaller and less pressure and more moisture.
And accordingly extend the ends of the urethra to the parts inside where it may enter the cavity of the foot, and tightly grasp the ends of the other parts so that the urethral limb does not remain outside the usual place.
And then apply the stretch over that, so that it does not harm the corrosive or post-thrust cautery nor emflacio, and if it harms any cause of those, then cut away from it and correct as much as possible according to what has been seen.
If in the bone there is pressure on the bone that you can engage, then you should cut that second part according to what is possible for you; otherwise, cover it with something and leave it, and care for that which precedes the rememoration inside which is cured.
And if some things are tightening this fracture of the thigh or another thing that is adjusted to those urethra, then so as has been said in the helper and in the arm,
But nevertheless in the restoration of it in such manner there is no harm to the hiccup; and if it is restored alone, or another thing that is applied to the other camba, then you should need that hiccup from that which you have most used.
You must know that the thigh is tightened for forty days or a few months or a few months, and this is due to the variety of complexions and other compositions.
Capitulum XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ankle bone.
You know that fractures of the ankle bone are rare, but they can occur with sudden movement.
If there is an injury to the ankle bone, it is not always a fissure or tear in its parts, and this causes pain or discomfort, and everything is usually felt.
And the restoration of the ankle bone is such that it is broken as if it were torn apart by the parts of the ankle, which are added and connected in order to achieve equality and difficulty and facilitation and production.
And then apply plaster and place your hand on that point; and tighten it as needed for the tightening.
And consider all the dispositions that have been recommended for other fractures, as it is similar to the application of cauterization and similarity to those that occurred in this case, which is convenient within the one that is healthy.
I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for the source
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba is a Latin phrase that translates to "Treatment of the fracture of
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil." is a Latin phrase that translates to:
When it happens that a fracture of the specified type occurs in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason a restoration is made of the shoulder as a restoration of the arm brace, and the operation is one.
If the three bones are tightly packed, the cushion is converted to all parts.
And if the bone is tightly packed underneath, the cushion is converted to the parts of Denant.
And if the bone is tightly packed from the outside, it is cut off there, and that is due to those causes that are not your own.
And then maintain the extension, equilibrium, and alignment of the bones according to that engagement.
However, if the fracture of the cushion is not due to movements, then the extension should be tighter and less flexible, and it will be more in your praise.
And if in the cushion there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you engage the stones and that complexly closes the entire operation, you will take pins of iron of the quality that is placed under the causes that are placed on the sides, and so make large cuts; later of those of which there is a small grating, and not be worried about the hands, and be the length of those according to the length of the cushion, and from the denol enter into the push of the side.
And he wraps around each limb according to its length, and stops one on the edge of the socket of one part and the other on the other part, and they are between the bottom of the foot and the ankle.
And if you have the dressings in three locations of the limb extremities and at the middle location, then this structure allows the socket to be prohibited from clinical action on the right and left sides, and is for good posture.
And a bandage of lead has been applied according to the length of the socket; and it is placed on the socket so that it preserves that of movement.
And I strongly advise you to do this in fracture, and when it is truly affected.
And for each day, consider the socket and study it according to what is appropriate, and you will guard against gangrene and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, you should immediately stop what I advise so that it may become healthy again.
Capitol. xvii.
When there is a break in the ankle or foot bones and toes, it is called a fracture.
Not all ankle breaks are fractures; some foot bones may have some cracks, and toes hardly ever break, and when they do it is only a sprain.
And if the foot bones are broken and sometimes those bones rise above each other, you must stop the patient's leg on the ground prepared as before.
Then place the other leg on that which is raised by those bones, and tighten those, and pull, and untangle those as they turn in their places.
Then place plaster and stop the wound, and place the abdomen of the leg on a small table with two claps plastered.
Then stretch that on the leg as much as possible, push that which you have wrapped in cloth and other causes of which you indicate.
And after three or four days, you will undo the ligament, when you will find the bones untangled, or they are broken, or dislocated, and the operation on them will be done with great care.
If the patient's symptoms are three in number, then restore those, and repeat them as you advised me in the restoration of the three symptoms of the patient. And then, place the second part of the stool one more step behind the first, and put a few of your hand on it; and then the foot of this table that you have recommended to me, and hold it tightly in that knot.
If it is necessary that the bones are two or three or more, then you should place your hand over each of these joints, wrapping them in a thick layer of cloth, and hold the table at the base of the foot, placing one of the corners of the table on the abdomen of the foot to keep it in good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in other fractures of the accidents that have been told; and avoid you all accidents that can happen to you.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip bone and the femur bone and the thigh bone of the man.
When the hip bone is fractured, make that wedge in that crooked piece, and then lean it slightly towards the end of the two, and hold it behind.
When the midwife uncovers the abdomen and makes it flat as possible, and places her hand on the patient's belly where she hopes to find the fetus; and the woman is in labor and raises the patient's shoulders one by one, until everything is forgotten inside that the part of the abdomen where the fetus is hoped to be and the bones return to their original position.
And pause pillows on the patient's back, and when you need to urinate, make it easier for the abdomen and then urinate, and reduce and return that second pillow to the hand that was initially used, and return the first pillow.
And fast for seven days or until it is restored.
And if you want, take once a glass of olive oil and press on the patient's thigh a cannula made of canvas; and enter the entire vesicle into the abdomen, and inflate it through the cannula as much as possible until the vesicle is inflated by the abdomen, and the fracture returns.
And make it full of air and stay for seven days after that has been recommended, until it is cured.
When the teeth of a man or woman are crowded, you should administer treatment and apply the remedy recommended in the bone of the ankle.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This fracture, however, is not hidden in these proximal fractures and does not end, mainly because of that to which you pay attention and use in your study and understand this free word; fourth, this fracture means for you in the larger dispositions of the dresser in restoration and in the stricture of the foot, and therefore you understand it.
When the gout attacks a man's member, take garlic from the ground, wrap it around, and put the member in that; and place a covering over it in the dressing cloth, and envelop it, and leave it for three days or wrap it around again, and it will be cured.
Chapter XIX.
Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when it is inflamed.
It is convenient for that to which the fracture occurs, and especially if the bones are large as those of the thigh or the helper, or it seems to be that you cut and suture that much so if the conditions of suturing are good at you or testify how many have said.
If the plague flows in, you must cover your mouth with the retention of the wetness that you sprinkle on the wound's edge, if there is no other cause.
When beginning to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it, if you do not want to cause an apoplexy.
If you do not want to cause an apoplexy, then continue the restoration of the fracture within three days, after the apoplexy has subsided, and do not return to him on the fourth day and the third part of the total time that you will spend causing accidents.
If the bone is sticking out over the discovered wound, then cover that and cut it down to reduce it and open it with your hands as easily and as little as possible.
If the extension is not prepared and the equipment for opening the bone is not ready, then reduce it with your hands as much as possible; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight dizzes or nine, and its latitude is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that the surgeon who takes from those three or four according to the quantity you indicate in the curacy in total specialty of fracture is necessary.
When making the incision, and if there is not enough space due to the patient's condition that it cannot be folded at that time during the operation, then...
If it is of sharp extremity that is located in the outer parts; and if the end of the foot is large, and the sole enters into the partitions.
This is the form of the foot:
It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small pocket.
Because the end of the foot comes up high on the end of the eminent bone.
And press that in a channel that returns the bone, and it is entangled at some accommodation.
And then try to entangle the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the foot is cut is subtle, and does not press on the stitch for good exception, you know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside that instrument has power of this.
If you cannot reduce the bone of all that has been recommended, then insert it into that which is desired for you from the scissors that have said; or sharpen that bone with one of the edges in any razor that is possible to you.
When one has found that the bones are rough and have been fractured.
When the bones are reduced and the pain in the thigh becomes very intense, you know that the bones will not return to their natural position; and then say that I have made great benefit to the thigh.
When you have completed your restoration to the bone, and you submerge yourself in cold sterile water, and particularly if it is summer, and do not stay on the ground or any other cause that may be there, so that you do not suffer from poisoning and corrosion.
And administer salves at the time of the high complement of the bone restoration, and leave the discovered pus undisturbed that is inscribed on the wound by the forceps and used according to the quantity of the pus.
And be careful not to strain the pus on the fracture, that no more motions are made to the fragments, and do not cause any great harm to the thighs that are dead or corroded or distorted, so it is unhealthy. If the second stricture were to be more severe, it would be softer and different from the other fractures' strictures.
If the plague is large or the plague is bad, and you fear that there are bad accidents that have been reported, and pain occurs in that place, then do not cover yourself over those altars, less you cover that enclosure with hard sheets in the place of stones and tighten it around that.
When the plague has begun to occur, that is, if there is a birth, then you should remove the sheet that was placed over it and administer calguas, as we usually treat plagues, which are treated with tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
It is recommended to you that you remove the liament and consider the plague in every day and evening, after it has been consolidated and closed, and cover that member with that tool so that the incision runs well from there to the parts outside, which are facilitated.
If in the plague there are several days, and it is not consolidated nor separated from the calguas, you should know that here are small parts for which you cover the plague with the hope that it will be treated. When you remove the sweat from those that are separated and those that are not separated, those that do not separate and cause the member to bend and cause pain, then insert your hand into the next one that is possible for you.
If you encounter the plague or the ulcer, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should know that you must stop at one of those that I suggest for the cure of the one that was previously mentioned in the capital.
And from that in which you cover that your speech covers and you present your hand: when it grows large, lean over the member as the one of the thigh and the helper and seem like to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it that motas veguadas happen for aqua the death; having less that passes through, that is more than the cayra per si aprop xx dias or xxx; and you cure the plague if you see it, and if not, lay it.
The text you provided is not in the language of medieval medical
1. "Capitol XX" is a Roman numeral, which translates to "20th century" in English. However, this does not seem relevant to the context of a medieval medical treatise. It might be a mistake or an
2. "Motas veguadas" translates to "unnatural movements" in English. So, the sentence means: "Unnatural movements occur in this fracture healing process, especially in the joints, and are caused by the figure of the limb; and therefore, it is strongly prohibited for the limb to perform its natural operation.
When considering if the node is recent and being administered in those medicines that have stipped the skin of the joint, and enses, and mira, and semblantz, and acrassia, and semblants; in those cases where you take some or all, and comfort them with those that have stipped the skin, or album of hou, or agree, and place that over the node in stop, and bind those around it with good constriction.
And the stricture that does not let it pass through those days; and if it is not removed, repeat it as often as necessary until the node becomes reduced; or strengthen over that layer of plout descentment, where one plout has the property of remaining totally uninflated in the members.
If the node has already been converted into peyra and is being stretched and necessity provokes the star of that coytadament, and you divide it by the part of the subsided part of the skin, and insert the superfluity and eminent, or ratz that node within which is reduced; and cure that within which is sick.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text "Capitol .
When a broken bone is being repaired and it is not following the natural course of the limb, it is called a malunion in medical terms.
When a bone fracture is restored, and if the member subtle and free is affected, then nothing is done except for motivating causes: which are many solutions of the limb and the ligament of the pain that do not follow; or due to excessive stricture of the limbs when nutrients are prohibited from running to the member; or due to excessive embrocation; or due to movement that does not occur at its time; or due to lack of sanctity in the corps of the patient and debauchery of the.
The translation of the first source sentence is: "The treatment for this condition involves applying heat to the affected area and making the patient lie down so that their limbs are extended; also, administer drinks and apply poultices of herbs over the area.
The translation of the second source sentence is: "And if you pause on the member, so that the belly can attract its nutrients, or continue to irrigate it with water, in order that the nutrient may return to its natural figure.
The translation of the third source sentence is: "Capitulus XXII
The translation of the fourth source sentence is: "Of the treatment of the bones when they are restored to their original state and prohibit the operation of the same bones from this point forward.
The translation of the fifth source sentence is: "When you arrive at the already restored member, so that the sanacio of the same bone is due to its tortuosity and eminence on the trincat, and it is formed in this way, but the member is not prohibited from natural operation, it does not cover that the word of that which exists in that member is of a different trincat.
The translation of the sixth source sentence is: "More has already been said by doctors and restaurators of those who have done this in our land; and this operation is very dangerous for those who fear the one that causes the death.
When claudication and nodulation are recent, it is believed that they are caused by watery humors that have entered the soft tissues of the legs, which cause them to become inflamed and swollen, resembling puffiness and redness; and it is thought that the plaster should be applied to the leg in a similar manner, with a beneficial effect on the soft tissues; or that it should be made of a mixture of olive oil and galls, or olive oil and cyprian, and be applied to the affected area; or that they are caused by greasy substances and are twisted around the veins, resembling the effects of some medicines that are used for consolidation.
And some women are dissolved by constant rubbing with oils that are more humid, and the movement of the member is administered to all parts at all times.
If tortuosity has already become entangled and becomes hard and converted into stone and provokes the need for iron treatment of the member, it is believed that the pus comes from the cecum and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and it is considered sufficient that the superfluous nodulation of those metals in the bones is removed, and there is ease in that area due to the relief of fatigue and study.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
The first line of the text you provided is "Capitol xxiii." This is likely a
Here is the translation of the first line: "Dislocation is an injury to one of the body's joints, which is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the member is pulled outwards towards the foot, causing great pain and wounds.
When you encounter an acute dislocation, you must penetrate as deeply as possible and quickly reduce it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiffened and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And so, you must not hesitate to make the joint mobile and not stiffened at the time of reduction, for if it is not done quickly, muscle spasms and painful contractions will come.
When this happens, you must quickly place your hands on the pubic cut, and then reduce the joint so that it pauses the reduction; and the member should be embraced with wet cotton and oil, and the reduction should be made with ease.
And the entire body is treated with this that the remorse comes to its place.
And I have already ordered the steps of dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the beginning of the chest, enter your finger into the end of the chest.
Capitol 24.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the mandible, go forward.
When the jaw teeth are dislocated and do not fit, and the dislocation of the jaw is caused by one or two hands: that is, if they are loose in their sockets with little movement, and are slightly softened; or if they are completely dislocated and compressed, then they should be gently pushed back into the joint between the thighs where saliva from the mouth comes out, and the tongue of the patient should not be able to close the mouth, and the tongue of the patient should be gently folded in its pouch.
When the dislocation of the jaw is slight, it can be returned to its original position with little cause.
When the dislocation of the jaw is complete and compressed, it should be carefully reduced with the patient's tongue, and it should not be delayed for too long.
And is that the physician holds the thigh of the patient, and inserts his hand between the two jaws of the jaw and presses on the side of the dislocation of the jaw that is causing the mouth to open, if the dislocation is in one part; or if he inserts both hands between the two parts, if the dislocation is in two parts, and the others say that they are deformed due to which ones engage; and orders the patient to stop his jaws and release them from any part; and the physician reduces the jaw and opens it when it returns to its original position.
If it is difficult to reduce the swelling, and especially if the jaws are dislocated, apply a poultice of water and olive oil, and then enter that the reduction of swelling is lighter than the reduction of jaws and do not delay the reduction of jaws of all, as they have said.
When they return and their teeth are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not closed, then place your hand over those powders of scented wax, and use some of rose oil; and thus make it easier for the patients to breathe.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head between two earls, so that he does not have any pain in the right or left side; and do not force any cause; if the patient's bed is under the leopard's paw, then when the pain becomes worse and the jaws are not shut, you should take it that it wants to.
And this will make it easier to administer, and do not worry about the edge of the mouth, the food and drink, and the chewing, as long as the jaw is not shut and healthy.
If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at some time and have not been converted to their proper places, then use gentle movements to alleviate fevers and frequent sweating, and often the stomach of the patient becomes upset, and often vomiting of pure choler.
When you see that it is necessary, you will know what to do; and those who have seen it before will advise you on the matter in six days.
Chapter 25.
Of reducing the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the shoulder joint due to its continuous movement in the chest; and some are dislocated at their beginning, and this is declared by pain.
And the reduction of the thatched roof over the right side of the body and extending the right thighs. And apply force to the location with your hand with a firm grip, so that it returns.
And place your hand over that plaster and powder and press on it.
Less the extremity of that which is cut by the knife and continues to be in that place, it is not dislocated at any time; you should know that it has been reduced and closed according to what has been said and according to what appears to you.
And place your hand over that plaster, powder, and bandage, and command the thatched roof to adhere to the wound and to be covered as soon as it is healed.
When this treatment is reduced to its lowest form, the end of the muscle is separated from its original position.
Capitulum.xxvi.
When reducing the displacement of the muscle.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, of which one is dislocated from the beginning of the tendon to the end of it.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the muscle, and this causes pain; and it is not dislocated in the back by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the front by the nerves.
And it is most dislocated and deformed at the end of the tendon, and it is most dislocated in those where the bones are few, and less so in those where the muscles are many; and it is most difficult to reduce them outside.
And many people suffer from striking or pressing, and the muscle of the patient becomes twisted due to twisting, and it is like this because it has already been dislocated.
And I advise you to leave this when you are over the patient's body, and to proceed with the cure of the patient.
This sentence seems to be describing the process of reducing a dislocated shoulder. Here's a possible translation:
If the hip or shoulder is dislocated and you perform forceful manipulations on it, do not panic.
And a reduction of this dislocation is made when it is fresh and the thigh is swollen.
And the reduction of the hip is when the attendant lifts the thigh to its parts; and places the cushion under the joints, strengthens them in their new position, and the attendant lifts the thigh again, extends it further, and places it down while returning gradually.
However, if it does not return, and the beginning of the dislocation was severe, days later, you will notice that the thigh is swollen with a hard, knotty, and unyielding skin, and lines of redness and inflammation appear, and the area is administered with milk, sugar, and honey.
And the thigh is pressed on the opposite side and placed down while the dislocation waits for the lana to be between lifted and strictured, and the surgeon places the sole of the foot on the support, elevates the head of the muscle as much as possible, and holds the thigh with the other hand so that it does not hurt the parts on this side, and another surgeon holds the head of the thigh, so that it does not hurt the parts on this side, until that it returns to its original position.
If you wish, reduce the second part of this maneuver: and it is that you will be presenting a man who is long than the thigh, and he is from the side of that latz, and enter the muscle of the other side of the thigh and raise the other leg to the parts outside when the thigh is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the tail of the thigh from the parts outside of the belly. If the thigh is bent, you should know that another cause may be suspended, so that this dislocation returns as soon as possible.
And if it is reduced with another maneuver: and it is that a long stem is fixed on the ground, like a mortier pilot, which is neither heavy nor thin, and its point is placed behind the thigh; push that the point is over the head of the stem, and the thigh is standing according to the length of the stem, and extend the muscle of the other side of the thigh to the parts outside of the other part; and extend the part of the leg of the other side to strengthen it, so that the joint returns to its original position at a high speed.
If it is difficult to reduce the patient's thigh in all causes that have been said, then use this remedy: and that you take two fists of the quantity which is at the end of two braces, and its latitude is four feet, and the largest part of the thigh is placed in the cavity of the thigh according to this form:
Then cover the head with clothes so that it does not cause pain to the patient.
Then place your hand on the thigh, and extend it over the knee or the leg, and see if the thumb is over the assistant and the leg and the end of the thigh.
Then place the arm on a scale according to its latitude, and extend the thigh to the ends, and the other part is suspended from the other side, so that the joint is as close as possible.
And when the wound of the thigh is complete according to whatever method you can, and you make sure that you leave the thigh dry in the amount of lint that is needed; and you cover it with a plaster prepared with powder of ginger and almond oil over all the muscle, as much as it is possible to turn around, and you tighten the wound more and more, and the limb is turned around on the plaster, and the thigh of the patient is anchored to the neck of the patient, and it becomes less, and not bad for seven days.
When the patient's food has been set aside for a little while and the member is comfortable, then it is time to apply the remedy to the patient.
And if the food is given less and more water or exercise; and then if it stops and does not soften, the patient has already been healed.
If the joint is dislocated by wetness that happens to it or by another cause, then you must know that in that case three points of cautery are given, according to what is said in the capital of cauterization.
And if it is all true and three days have passed and the limb slides and the joint does not close, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some parts, and it does not close and cannot raise the arm to the parts on either side, you know that those nerves of yours, which are at the top of the muscle, have already been injured or stretched or softened, and you know that the joint will not remain in place for long.
Regarding the dislocation of that which is caused by you, you must have the chest and the thighs or the parts behind reduced by impulse and extension over the greatest parts, and then it returns.
When the other stricture is administered and the entrance that is healed is cured.
If the injury is serious in the member and slows down the movement, use the bandage made of woven threads that will alleviate the pain and return to the natural state of the first part.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of a dislocation of the thigh.
You know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the part that separates from the part behind, and the dislocation of the thigh is not avoided if you are careful or if you are careless when you see or touch the opposite part, and when you adjust the dislocated thigh, declare it clearly to you, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that the other muscle.
And cover the parts you can, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible that comes to the post-aposteme caut, where if you see the post-aposteme caut, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, and not all are healed; and especially when you reach the posterior parts, where there is bad luck for all other types of dislocations, with more pain and writhing movements that are needed for that.
When restoring the patient, when it is possible to reduce, it means that the body of the patient should be extended as much as possible, and the arms of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are over the knees and in front of him, and the doctor punctures the joint with a needle at the ends of the fingers or at the base of the palm entangled in its place.
If the dislocation is in the hinge parts, then return as if you double the body of the patient at its own body, within which it pierces the thigh with the base of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong motion.
And it is that two hands extend the arms, and hold that extension with those hands so that the extension is not harmed by the extension.
And if the arm is rotated completely, then it should be rolled doubled long over the body of the patient or limbed.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, then apply that oil on any part so that this is those causes which help in lubrication of the joint for ease; and administer strong pressure on the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
When reducing the cover that is placed over the one that is stitched with string and excoriated with album of hair, and is also extended to the stricture below, and the arm is suspended from the collar, and left for several days.
And if it is slipped; and then, if the joint is formed in that place, you should slide the limb and leave it there.
If you see that the joint is not tightening, then you should reapply the plaster and bandage to it, and leave it for several days after it has been stretched; and then slide it.
If you happen to fall or the reduction of the joint is not stable, and the position of the leg is in movement, then you should administer hydration and gentle friction in the bath and compresses, until it is released; or rest on the affected joint, which is a heavy moveable part; and then slide it, and leave it over the bone and the nail. And then remove it and put it in the bath; and when it dries, you should gently rub the joint with temporary friction, and then slide it over the affected part, which is a heavy moveable part, one vein, another, and the third. When there is an intramuscular wax, if it is limited, it can be removed by a physician.
If you wish, stop over the wet and sanded handle of that cow, and apply pressure on that part; and make some marks, four on each side and reduce it to its original position.
Chapter 28.
The treatment of shoulder dislocation is from the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
If the shoulder is dislocated from the chest, and the reduction of the dislocation is difficult, and it is not due to other joints, but rather because of speed in reducing the shoulder at the time when it is dislocated, this is because the location is herniated or because it occurs in the hernia hernia.
And the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the chest on a table and extend the shoulder of that one, and you press your hand or your palm over the entrance of the joint, and push it back to its original position.
When the abdomen is already exposed to the belly of the patient, then place the thigh on the table for extension and reduction; and if dislocation precedes the thigh, then place the position of the thigh of that intrinsic one over the table, so that the doctor's hand covers that joint.
And if you return quickly, good; and otherwise, stretch that arm as much as possible, and let go of that; and do not stop here, for otherwise, you will not be able to reduce the pulsations that pass in those days.
However, the joint of the Roman is after its tortuosity; and you do not notice any cause at all, except that the thigh is softened and cannot be stretched for any cause; you know that the nerves are trapped or twisted, and you do not engage in it but rather it is stretched with a point on the joint and the force of the doctor confirms any cause.
And when the wound is returned, place yourself on the stretcher that has been recommended, and let it be loose and stretched for days; and after that, discontinue and let it be loose and the thigh of the patient be exercised.
If the movement of the patient is stopped and there is any heaviness in the limbs, and there is some pain in certain parts, then enter if it is possible.
Chapter 29.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Some fingers are dislocated in all parts.
And when a finger is dislocated in the thumb or the palm of the hand or the chest of the patient, you hold the finger and push it back into its place, if possible, and return it.
And hold the tip of the finger, suspend that part from which it was dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
And suspend that and extend it when the swelling is less on that day.
And when it is time to take off the splint, read that second narration and do not slide that on the day and exercise movement, and keep it at night; and continue for some days until it becomes firm.
And appear as if this is true, if it is dislocated in the chest of the patient and you hold it at that part and make the second operation within two days, and it will become healthy.
When it seems that this is called gout when it occurs in other parts.
Capital of the city of xxx.
Of the cure for the displacement of the vertebrae of the back.
When someone suffers from the complete displacement of any vertebra of the back or neck, and there are still other vertebrae that remain dislocated, and it is not cured, then death will come to the bad end.
And it is said that the excrement of the bad end is outside the will of the person, and cannot be held; and if it is seen that the members are softened by the pain, or the changes in the legs or chest, or one of those; or a vertebra is dislocated at that place, where the pain is felt, and the pain is felt and the displacement of those four parts is made.
Therefore, it is already softened to the rear parts and is not felt as painful.
The cure of the patient is that you consider if the softening occurs due to weakness, where there is no cure or not for that, nor for the whole.
When one feels pain in the thigh or leg due to striking or pressing on it, or for appearance's sake, they should immediately seek medical attention. The first source sentence translates to: "When one feels pain in the thigh or leg due to striking or pressing on it, or for appearance's sake, they should immediately seek medical attention.
When it is not cured by any other means but by that which has happened to the two members of the body that I recommend, then it is not cured.
If the wound is extended over the face of the patient, covering almost the entire face, and it is extended further down the neck to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Then place a cushion under the patient's feet, place it on the ground at the end of the thigh near the head of the patient, and another cushion under the knees of the patient in the other end of the pillow.
The minister holds the cushion, and it is not stopped in a depression; and another minister holds the second one in the same way.
Then wrap the cushion over the patient's head and hold it firmly with your hand; and extend the end of the belt to the cushion under the head of the patient, and tie it there; and tighten the other belt over the knees of the patient, and adjust all the belts and tie them to the other cushion under the feet of the patient.
When the minister extends the limb to the end of the thigh, and does not leave any part of the thigh or limb uncovered, it is said that he does not finish until he has seen the patient's condition.
The doctor places his hands over the spine for strength as he returns, or over that table, and adjusts the weight of the legs as they return.
If he does not return in this way, one must use a table where the latitude or longitude is at least three degrees, and dig into the wall of the same place where it has been said that a location for the maze is found at the end of the table. And he pauses the path of the table over the spine, and the doctor places his hands on the other end, and stretches as soon as the spine is straight and returns to the original location.
And if you wish, open the path that was turned around by the maze; and it is that you must fix the location of the maze at the end of the table, and the longitude of the two thighs should be a degree, and the location of the end of the thigh must be at the end of the two thighs, and the longitude of each thigh should be a palm, and it has been made in each thigh as it turns, and each one must stop on land because there is no harm.
When a joint is swollen and painful, it is called a "gout" by doctors. This condition often affects the feet and can be treated with a pointed cautery to make points on the surface of the foot. If the intestine or hernia needs to be returned to its cavity, the area should be supported to prevent
In the end of the joint, a groove is formed in which a pointed cushion is placed, and its length is similar to that of the pointed cushion; in the other two joints, it resembles this one. This means that the same type of cushion should be used for all three joints to ensure consistency in treatment.
Then, tighten the ligaments that have been stretched in the chest of the patient in the groove that you have made, and tighten the ligaments that have been stretched in the thighs in the cavity that you have made. This will help to stabilize the joint and prevent further injury.
You must make sure that each joint is properly aligned and supported by a surgeon who knows how to reduce the joint to its natural position and engage the spine according to the instructions given. This will help to ensure that the joint is properly aligned and functioning correctly.
Then, push the spine back to its natural position and engage the area around the joint. Then, cover the joint with a damp cloth and stop. Then, place your hand over the dressing and make sure it is securely in place. The length of the spine should be three fingers or more, and the width should be as wide as the joint's width. Over the joint, place a piece of cloth to protect it.
When you have found the part that has been described, and use the remedy of subtle nourishment that is within it to make it healthy again.
If you find any symptoms in the location at the end of the cure, you should know that medicines have been administered that are harmful and unfit for long-term administration, as recommended; and this has already been administered in that place with a plaster.
If some signs of danger appear in the back of the spines of the two, and it is due to that displacement; and that part which has already been injured for which there is no hope that it will be healed with this medicine, because it is very difficult for you to add life to it.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always mean dislocation, but only occur when they are dislocated in those places where dislocations of small removal and concavity also occur.
And when the joint of the ankle is dislocated, it can be due to four causes: either the parts of the fingers, or the parts of the thumb, or the parts of the knuckles, or the parts behind.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When the joint is dislocated from the parts of the limb, and you adjust the thigh bone according to the healthy one, it becomes long and hangs downwards that of the healthy one, and the thigh cannot bend the knee that you must stretch the leg, and it is the place where you stretch the leg after the knee joint, because the head of the thighbone has already come here.
The first line of the text translates to: "The cause of that by which accidents occur is in the parts that are deformed, because the accidents of this are opposite to that one.
When a dislocation occurs in the joints of the limbs, and the gout is not folded back to its original position, and if it is perforated to go forward and cannot be covered over in the surrounding parts; and the urine of the patient is retained and the erection of the penis is lost, then you must cover the wound with a dressing and the erection of the penis with a bandage, and you must cover the ambulatory with a cloth.
When a dislocation occurs in the joints of the limbs, and the gout does not expand the part behind, nor can it be folded back to its original position, and the thigh is pushed out, and the erection of the penis is lost, and the end of the thigh is at that location.
Few reductions of this dislocation are possible if you consider it, doctor, if the dislocation is ancient and antiquated, that it has already been treated in ancient times according to the method that you have used for reduction of the limb and Roman after its disposition, doctor, no need to cover that in that care; and then no cause to be amazed.
When the displacement is recent in that joint, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, you cut along the direction of the joint and extend it to the parts of the fingers and toes, and also to the thumbs on both sides, as much as possible, without requiring another treatment.
If the displacement does not return in this manner, you should prepare for a strong minister and extend the axis of the bone from the end of the part where it is located, or from the one that is most comfortable for you, or from the one that is visible over the axis of the bone; and another minister extends the end of the bone as far as the tips of the fingers; and hold down the tendon on the end of the bone, and another minister holds the extremity of the tendon.
And if it is extension of the bone or of the finger to the ankle at the end of the finger, or from the back to the other foot.
And if the extension is of all those in a line between when that part is raised and the side of the earth and hangs down.
This special form of extension is common to all four.
If the dislocation returns, then so be it; otherwise, you will need to do this in all cases that concern your own cure.
In the reduction of the own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the parts of the fingers, cover that the thigh be stretched over the side of the table; and pause the limbs over the ridge of the cushion in that place where the head of the thigh ends and the rest of the cushion begins; and extend the limb from the part of the girdle to the other part of the ankle.
And another minister firmly grasps the braces of the thigh, and presses the large end of the table on the thigh and extends the parts in front by extension strongly, so that it returns to its own place.
This method is used in the cure of this member that is reduced, as opposed to the other members.
If you are excused from you and do not obey the entrance of this method of cure of all, then know that the two ends of the thigh are fastened with a strong limb, longer, over the toes and the heels.
When the length of one part of the body is determined by the quantity of four digits, and the cavity of the thigh is extended more than the other by the quantity of two digits.
And if the thigh is suspended over the head of the chair, and it is in the highest part; and the length of it is equal to two braces.
And command a young man to cut off the head of the thigh, and suspend it at the other thigh, and the other man to cut off the thigh with forceps, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
In the reduction itself, when there is a dislocation at the end of the part, it is necessary that the thigh covers the groin according to what has been recommended in the case; and it is tightened over the cavity of the thigh actually and over the chest.
And if two thighs are placed, one on the foot and the other on the head; and if the thighs are adjusted to the edge of the pillow that is on which the humors are folded, so that the thigh does not get caught between the thighs of the patient, because you must extend the parts beyond the knee, otherwise it will be torn.
And if every minister extends his hand to his part, and the doctor places his hand on it and reduces it according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the joints, it is necessary to extend the cambric leaguerly, and follow this narrative on the hill; and the physician places the palm of his hand over the bad smell, and presses it with the other hand on the adjacent part, and that extension stops at the adjacent joint.
And if the dislocation is behind the joints, it is not necessary to extend the bad smell to the adjacent parts, and he should be raised on the ground; if there is a hard cause, listen to what has been said about the pain of the thigh when the ankle is dislocated in the rear parts, following what has been said about the jamming of the thigh over two thighs; and it should be over the face and the limbs are extended, following what has been said, there will be no harm.
When joint pain is being treated with pressure, place the table over the location where you want to apply the compression.
Then, when the reduction is complete — and the member that was reduced is returned to its original position — you should adjust the thighs and place an ice pack on the part that is not too wide in any of the parts; and secure the member with bandages for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and ice pack, and compare one thigh to the other.
If you see those joints in position, you know that the dislocation is firmly fixed, and then let the member go.
If you see any cause of softening, return and apply that, and then extend it again according to your first stretch, and let it be for three days.
And then remove that bandage, and let it rest in the ambulance for several days, until it is comfortable.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to
Dislocation of the toe
This line seems to be discussing the location of a dislocated bone. Here's a possible translation:
When the sign of dislocation of the leg is that the patient applies their hand to the thigh, you should know that it is indeed dislocated.
The restoration of all the fingers of the patient is that you stretch the thigh of the patient, if it can be extended beyond that; attach the other end to the face of the patient, and place the thumb between the patient's thighs; and appropriately attach the finger of the patient to your palms, and retie those between the fingers of the patient's hand over the joint for strength, and another minister extends the thigh until the finger returns to its place.
The sign of reduction of the leg is that the patient's hand clings to the thigh, lifting no labor.
And apply an ointment to that and make the hand cling to the thigh, and tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and remove them.
And do not use the walking aid for more than a few days, until it is healthy and comfortable.
If the reduction of the foot to you is excused, then administer strong support to the limbs that were in the care of the ankle before this report.
I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a
The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle (
The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that sometimes the ankle can be dislocated by gentle traction, while other times it requires more forceful manipulation. The dislocation can occur at the joint or at the surrounding bones.
The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that sometimes the ankle becomes swollen after the dislocation, which can be caused by the part of the ankle that was dislocated.
The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that the treatment of the traction of the ankle is usually gentle, and it should be extended as far as possible without causing pain, and then slowly returned to its original position.
The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that when the ankle is dislocated by forceful means, one should immediately make a reduction, and hold the ankle with a firm grasp of the back part of the two fingers on the opposite side of the ankle in the patient's leg.
When you approach the second toe of the swollen foot, and your left hand is in the location of the swelling on the foot.
And then hold the foot with your right hand, and stretch your left arm twice, and extend your left arm; and press the chest of the foot with the left hand at the second toe.
And then make the same movements according to the number of counts.
And then press the chest of the foot with the left hand at the third count, and you are in the cavity.
Therefore, if you return in one count or two seconds after this hand movement, and you see the foot swell, stop; and otherwise, continue with the operation, and wait for it to return.
However, if you are prohibited from reducing the hand that has been recommended, place the thigh on a hard surface over the ground, and stretch out a flat piece of earth on the ground that fits between the thighs, and you have already rolled over the drap so that it does not expose the wound.
When the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot over the patient's most or the one that lies on the collar of the foot; and extends that same minister against the extension of the leg part, and the hand is present between the patient's thighs, retaining it there, so that this action of yours does not cause pain in the parts beyond its extension.
And if the surgeon reduces the displacement of the leg bones, and another servant holds the patient's thigh firmly in its place, so that the displacement returns to ease.
And when the displacement returns to its original position and is declared healthy by you, stop plastering and extend it further, and tie the foot to the leg with a cord.
And be careful or take care of the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the foot over that is not too tight and does not cause pain to the leg.
And keep it like this for two or three days, and if the foot becomes soft, extend it further.
When the swelling is reduced by the third day or the fourth, and it is forbidden for the patient to walk for forty days. If it is necessary to walk on that space, it is not safe to assume that the dislocation is not over the dissolved and corrupted part, and therefore it does not receive care.
And if you encounter this cauterization point, it is necessary to administer care in the hydration of the water that was previously mentioned in our narrative, in another place of care and embellishment, until it is rejuvenated.
Capitol, Chapter XXXIV.
Of the care of the dislocation of the two feet.
Cover that the one who is dislocated is engulfed by little extension of his work; and that it is not difficult, almost all.
If the dislocation is in the two toes of the foot, it is necessary to cover that you make cut the sole of the foot on the ground or on a table, and be present as if it were going to happen.
And if you are standing on the foot, and place the other foot on that which you imagine to be from the joints, and apply that to the foot with your hand until it returns, and see that it is engulfed and does not appear in the most prominent place.
And then pause the abdomen of the foot of the patient on a table that grasps the entire foot, which has two caps, and press that with a firm grip for three days; and then remove it and make it heal gradually over fourteen days, until it is stretched and secured.
Capitol Chapter XXXV.
Of the species of dislocation that are caused by pain or fracture or by some other cause.
When any cause happens to those, and you are in the care of that and its restoration, many steps will follow until the death of the patient.
And therefore it is not presumptuous to assume that the care of the patient is in the art, long practiced, merciful and pious, late, neither arrogant nor presumptuous; and that it should be used at the beginning of medicines which only give apostemas, and lay the blame on divine judgment, not on that to which one hopes for salvation, but on that for the alleviation of pain, and in which there is some hope. And then spend so much effort on reducing him at the beginning of the cause, because it will eventually lead to cautery.
And if the member returns later than you want, administer the regimen that causes cautery and cures gout, as is necessary for the relief of the pain caused by the dried-out members.
And if dislocation is mistaken for fracture and occurs in the separated bones of the pubic region, you should pierce the statement of those bones, and do as has been said in the simple maladies of this to prevent any further damage.
And guard and avoid afterwards the intrament in the ways of fear following what I have preached; for this is better for you to owe your true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to him as you see those in his time. This is the end of the paragraphs of Albucasim, perfectly translated from the original Latin text. May God be pleased with these. Amen.
