The first line of the text translates to "O, fools, you have completed this book, which is the end of medical science, as the conclusion of his work, and through the examples of his work, and the declarations of his work, I see that you have comprehensively covered this for you in this treatise, which is part of the operation from my hand, so it is surgery.
The first source sentence translates to:
It is observed that you are alive in this order of this treatise on the second way of exposure and declaration, and for the reason that you will come to the forms of the instruments of cauterization and of the other tools of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of the same, which is necessary.
The cause for which the artisan is not able to create the artifact as desired in the past, it is because the art of medicine has become longer in this current time, and that the actor is not yet exercised in the science of anatomy which Galien knew after he knew the properties of the members and their shapes, and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons, and their number, and the quality of them, and the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of the excitations of them.
For that reason, says Iocaste (also known as Yoprasus), who has a small work but mainly in the art of medicine.
We have not yet spoken of that in the introduction of this book; for what we have said about anatomy is not without error, which causes many men to die, as you have seen many of them, who are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
You have seen a surgeon folding and experiencing an abscess in the thigh of a woman, and incising some arteries of the thigh so that great blood flows out when the woman dies between the shoulders of you.
I saw another doctor who said that he had seen a stone in the urine of a man who had been in his state, and the stone was large, and it came out of the bladder through a small opening, so that this man died on the third day.
I then called for help to remove that stone, and I saw that it was due to its large size and the position of the bladder that it would cause the man to die.
I saw another doctor who received payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he went to a blacksmith who was known for his skill in fixing fractures in the thigh; and this doctor, being ignorant of the procedure, tried to fix the fracture with plates and bolts, but did not successfully close the wound.
And it slipped according to the will of God, and the bone was set, and it healed over time and commanded that we unbind the leg; and I thought that the thigh and the foot would be better, but it turned out that the thigh and the foot were worse.
When you summon him and he appears, take the linen and gently unwind it, and achieve calm and ease to alleviate his pain.
However, if corruption was confirmed in the member, it could not be stopped from spreading, and the corruption could not be stopped from spreading throughout the thighs.
I saw another doctor who performed an appendectomy and had ulcers appear after a few days, due to the malice of the lord of the house.
The cause is that the cramp is purely due to melancholic humor, and it does not come from the lord of the house, but rather from the member that has suffered from all of this, which has been harmed by all.
Therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be performed in two parts: one part is in the operation associated with health, and the other part is in work with the larger possessions.
And you have already existed in this free place where the operation was performed in which errors and fear were committed; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and lay that, so that the children do not fall into speaking and telling lies to you.
When you have prepared your weapons for the sake of your own concern and protection from God, and your wounds are open and uncovered.
When you use the best way through the grace of God, those who are lost in salvation and praise find success, and you treat the most terrible wounds with difficult surgery, and you keep your weapons ready for that which terrifies you, so that your faith and your name do not escape: four things remain to your glory, and one more in the world and in the afterlife among your sanctities.
Glory has already been given in some of my enemies: Do not treat wounds poorly, because bad doctors do not know how to.
And you have already had to follow this free lesson three capital laws.
Begin the division of the free, and first of the first part. The first law ordered at the head of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the force of the cautery, and for that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second source sentence to translate:
This sentence appears to be discussing the capital (or main) chapter of something related to restoration and displacement, as well as the care of bends and semblances for those. It is ordered from the head down to the feet, and from the forms of the instruments.
This sentence seems to be asking whether you question the quality of the remedies (or "juvamentz") and instruments (or "noccumentz") used in that cauterization, and in which collection or category it is prohibited. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
This sentence appears to be discussing the sermon (or "sermo") about the quality of the remedy and instrument used in cauterization. It states that it is a long and prolix (or tedious) sermon, subtle (or delicate) in its knowledge, and secret (or hidden). It has been spoken to a great number of wise men, and they have disagreed about it, and for me, a little of their words is enough to fear longing. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
I now say that cauteries comfort all composite bodies universally, which are made of the same matter or its matter, except for two composites, which are cauda (tail) bodies made of the same matter.
In the collection of dry and decaying matter, there are those who use cauterization for that, and others use the opposite, which is not suitable for diseases that are caused by lack of quality and dryness, because nature of the fire is also lack of quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that diseases of the tail and dry skin are cured by being burned and dried.
And if you disagree with what I said earlier, that cauterization is beneficial in all diseases of the tail and dry skin that are seen on the bodies of men, then when you compare the body of a man to the collection of fire and his humidity, you will find that the body of a man is burned.
And if you say according to that speech, that this has already been experienced by me in my own life, I have discovered it.
However, I do not know that this will come over time, that which has already been expropriated and exercised in the capital of cauterization for the exercise of the same, and knows the diversity of the bodies of men and their disposition of diseases in them, and their causes, and the accidents of the same, and the passage of time for the same.
In other complexes, it is not about your fear, and especially in wet and filthy diseases, such as gout and fever, all doctors are accustomed to using this method, and no one has ever been harmed by cauterization in these cases.
It is wise, friends, that the secret of curing by cauterization is not known for its merit, but rather for the fire used in medicine, which is simple, and the effect of which does not reach the other member except the one being cauterized and not to the other members adjusted only to a small amount of pain.
Less the effect of combustible medicine reaches the other members except the one being cauterized, and more often it comes to the member of difficult cure and more often it is heard.
Less the fire, by its superiority and substance, does not do so much as it is superfluous. And we have learned this by experience and long practice of studying the art of the truth of causes; and therefore you are excused for the length of the discourse and if not that it is not related to my free will in this pause of your secret of the fire, and the quality of the operation of the knife in the body and the expulsion by which you expel the diseases, the philosophical discourse is demonstrated, which is sharp in your hands.
When the wise children realize that it is not convenient to perform cauterization at the time of first attempt, they should wait for a more suitable time.
You say that cauterization is convenient in all times, because the accident due to time is submerged in the advantage of the one who has the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, more and faster, the sufferers do not suffer delay because it is feared that those who come later will be greater than smaller harm entering through time.
And you do not care about your patients, or children, they only think of the common people and the lazy ones, because that cure which is done by cauterization is not always effective for a long time, and they leave the consequence.
The cause is not that they are afraid of doing it for this, because cauterization is not only a place for medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the humidity which is the cause for the pain to come.
However, cauterization is overused in medicine because of its request for the virtue and excellence of its operation and the greatness of the Lord's servant.
It is possible that the patient's malady will return at some point in time, according to the composition of the illness and its location within the patient's body, as well as the virtue of the patient and the fact that it has been prepared in the heart of the patient due to the aggregation of excess elements in the body, and the fact that it has been received by the patient through vagaries and similar causes; however, if the malady that is being treated with cauterization is a subtle malady in a few parts of the member and with little moisture, then it is possible that it will not return to that pain, rather it will be in small pieces.
It is said that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and it is a common saying, not because I understand it in it, but because I believe that cure does not rely on profiting from medicine or any other cause of cauterization.
However, the cause is in contrast to that; and I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is not only when they administer the remedies for cures in some diseases, and those medicines do not confirm, and instead in the end they manage hom with cauterization, and profit from it. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When making points with a pointed cautery, it is better than using a regular cautery, and it should not be done unless the gold is of equal quality to its own substance.
It is important to ensure that the location of the cauterization does not burn, as it will not be absolutely effective if the gold is not completely exposed. If you have already tried and found that it does not work in other parts of the body, then using a pointed cautery is better than using a regular one. However, when performing cauterization on gold with a pointed cautery, it is important to consider the quantity of gold you want for the severity of the gold, and to prepare some fat for the recipient; and if you place the fat over the burned area, the gold will be in the fire, and there may be some layers for the artisan to occupy themselves with.
Therefore, when performing cauterization with a regular cautery, it is important to use it lightly and precisely during the operation.
You have already ordered this capital in the cauterization according to the other capitals, and you have ordered those of the foot inside the feet, so that the patient can easily get what they want from it.
The first source sentence to translate is: "De cauteri de dolor de
This cauterization confers humidity and coldness upon the accidented part of which the painful cause is, causing sodomy and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the smooth parts of the hips and thighs, and numerous sleeplessness, and toothache and guolayro, and universally in all maladies that appear due to coldness, as if paralyzed, sodomy, apoplexy, and seeming in those maladies.
The form of this cauterization is this, which first commands the patient to evacuate the head that has been cut open by a cautery, three or four times, according to the virtue of the body and its age and custom.
And then commands him that race the head with a razor, and then place it between your thighs on a low stool and hold your hands over the chest you want.
And then pause the tip of your thumb on the nose of the pus that is under the skin between your fingers. However, as the saying goes in this place, that location is often targeted, and it is customary to use olive oil for this purpose, which is of the following form:
And then place it on the location that is often targeted, with your hand that descends, which is of the following form: and you will turn that over.
And then take your lighter and look at the location, and if you see already any amount of bone exposed in the cheek, as much as the amount of errors, then raise your hand, and if not turn your hand on that iron, and another of that, if it is frozen, enter that is seen of the bone that I have told you to you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the location and rub that for three minutes.
And then place your thumb on the edge of the burn and rub that over it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. When treating the area with an antipyretic remedy, it is important that the area is properly prepared beforehand.
When the Romans performed a cesarean section, they often used honey to prevent infection and improve the outcome.
They would cauterize the spine inside the bone and hold it in place until the cauterization was complete.
If the patient's leg is affected by the disease, then it should be treated accordingly.
They would also use other methods such as the "alchemical catapult" if the cauterization did not work immediately. This is the method used for small wounds: It is estimated that the vapor of the head will be exhaled from that location.
If the wound is held for a long time and is properly treated, it will be cured when it is solidified.
I have not seen these special types of cauterization before, only in the hands of experienced surgeons; and that is why I say that it is better for your health when it is done, because the head is separated by a solution of continuity of the flesh as has been testified in other parts, and especially when the head of the thigh is freed from nature.
The specificity of the first point (cauterization) is safer and better done by me; and from that point on, it is more beneficial for the health.
The text you provided is in an old form of Latin, not
similar to Italian, Spanish, or French. Here's a line-
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs all over the head, and it is prolonged in the skull, and there are used for dressings and bandages and purgatives and plasters and ointments and creams and washes, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that does not cause pain or irritation to that part of the skull caused by those causes, then consider if the head of the skull is of strong origin in its nature; and do not use too much and make it bleed greatly, and if that cauterization is done on another part of the head with a smaller cautery. When it is necessary to make points on the corner of the ear, then do so with a pointed cautery. Cut the coda and let it expose the bone quantity that has been found, and cauterize it with a cautery at the corner of the head in the place called the vas, — and that place is where the wind is paused. And thank you for your attention, and do not discover the bone, as the thigh suffers from a different kind of pain than that caused by all other cauteries on the head.
And you direct this cauterization at that place, where the corn is that causes the cauteries on the head and the occipital bone is placed with a subtle cauterization that is applied to the same location of the head; and this is the form of it.
End of chapter.
On the cauterization of ancient non-migratory.
When in the corner of the head pain is felt, or if there is a sharp pain entering the wound, it should be evacuated with medicine from the head, and the other cure should be administered, which you have told in the chapters of the diseases; and do not profit from it, cauterization can be done in two ways: either with acute medicine burning or with iron.
When using cauterization in medicine, you should take a red-hot poker, and carefully touch the ends of the wounds with the hot iron. Then, if you find the painful spot in the chest wall, use a thin needle and pierce it at the point where the pain is located, either above or below the ribs.
Then, after tying the bandage around the affected area, leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and clean the wound with water or soap, and let it dry in the open air if the place is exposed to the sun.
And cure that part as soon as it is healed.
If you find any burning medications, use those that you have written about in the book of burning medicines.
Cauterization is followed by this method: ignite the following:
It is called a "clasp nail," which is shaped like a thimble with a curve in it, and is placed in the small hole at the tip of the toe.
And place your hand over the painful location, and roll your thumb around it gently so as not to rupture the artery that is present - and quickly turn the little iron around.
If the quantity of blood that is rushed out by the dissection of the abdomen is less than what is expected, and you turn your hand over so as not to rupture the artery that is present - so that no pus comes out.
And apply a poultice of salt water to the affected area and place it there for three days; and apply a poultice of mullein leaves around the border, and take care to cleanse the wound as soon as it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize at the end of the tail with a cauterization, and keep an eye on the incision of the artery in this unusual place.
Capitol quarter.
Of ancient emigrant cauterization.
When you cure the ancient wound that has been said of the previous cure, and what has been said in the divisions of the diseases, and do not take advantage of the cure, and sometimes by the disease that does not satisfy what has been said of the first cauterization in medicine or the cauterization in focus, you see that you should put the tail cautery through the location of the pain that is along the line of the longue of which the wound is the tail, or that; and lay down your hand for a moment and tense it there while incising the artery and pervenging it within the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is harmed by chewing, and that the lizard not be harmed and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not expand spasm.
If it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that branches, there is fear in the branching of the artery, and above all to that which ignores that he does and does not study and practice; and thus the operation is left to begin.
When you arrive at the recall of the flow of blood in the case of an accident to the artery according to the right hand side, in the place where this free one is located.
If you see that this wound does not respond to this cauterization and you see the corpse of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as they have met, and treat the plague when it is healed.
And if you see, maintain the cauterization that they said in the capital of stretching of the artery at the cauterization that has two points, and this cauterization is better and less frequent.
Capital.
Of cauterization of the pain of gout.
When in the gout you feel pain due to cold and it is cured by causes local and by the other treatment that I have told you in the division, and the pain does not worsen, then ignite the cauterization, and this is the one that has the name of point, of which this is the form:
And place the point near the ignition, and be directed around the whole gout as the wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in each one. Along the joints of the golden elbow, place a cautery point by point as needed to treat the wound.
If the cautery points are placed throughout the elbow, and then removed, and the wound is properly cared for, it will heal.
Capitulum VI.
Chapter 6: Cauterization of Scarring.
Scarring that is treated with cauterization is not the only type of scarring that can be treated with cauterization, according to what has been said in the sections of the diseases.
Avoid cauterization for spasticity or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that scar of the turtura, use jewels and purgatives and gargle, and if your cure is not effective, you must cauterize the elbow three times: the first time on the golden elbow, the second time a short distance away, and the third time on the conjunctiva of the labia.
And pause the cauterization for the opposite side of the affected part, four mollfactions will not be visible until the part that appears to be healthy.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize the part with the cautery at the end of the extremity of the small nail above the corner of the head, and at another place, the longer one of which is second in length to the said point, and then your hand depauses am cauteri when it is burned by the quantity of the fat of the species of the spine.
This is the form of cauterization, and it is special for the blacksmith, the form of which is drawn on paper. However, that part is quite thin and has few bones; and it covers the part with excessive flesh a little.
And then cure the place with what is called for in the process when it is healthy.
Capitol, Volume VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is present and it is treated with what has been said and does not confirm your medication and the patient does not have a fever, then you should cauterize that part with four cauteries: on all the corners of the head; and at the corner of the head where they have mentioned; and at the corner of the cheek. When the cautery hand is made according to what is said, it is customary to call it a glove.
And if it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is less painful; and it is customary to call it a gastrocolic.
Chapter VIII.
Cauterization of forgetfulness is made with a hot iron.
It is customary to give the patient large doses of pills at the beginning, which are meant to make him feel better.
Then take the entire head of the patient and place it on the cheek that is opposite to the one described in the chapter of plasters.
And hold the patient's head there for a while, then place the cautery hand on it. Then do as is said according to those measures.
If for those who are healed, it is; and if not, then do three cauterizations on the same side of your head, which are taken from the corner of the nose that goes into the corner of the mouth that is opposite to the one that is closest to the chin. And pause between each cauterization of the said point, and properly care for the cauterization as it proceeds.
If you add more and the thigh is tolerant, place the cauterization in its proper location; and if you see more addition, cauterize it on both sides of the hips.
Properly care for that which is becoming healthy; and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to the form given.
Chapter 9.
Of cauterization of parasites and hardening of the entire body.
Cover that you process in hardening of the head and as it has been said; and remove the head of the thigh, and properly place the cauterization on the said point of the head, and cauterize on all parts of the head, and cauterize on the opposite side of the leg, and three times cauterize on the spines of the collarbone.
And if it is necessary in the hardening of the body of many parts and tolerant thighs and strong belly, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the spines of both sides, and then cauterize within which is corroded by the mot of the belly, and raise the other leg. When treating that part which is healthy, and this is olive oil cauterization.
Capitol, Chapter X.
Of cauterization for epilepsy.
It is not cauterized the epileptic except that epilepsy is by strangulation.
And therefore, it is necessary to change the brain of the patient at the beginning of the menstrual cycle and in the other treatment that has been prescribed in the division when the womb is large and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if the child who did not suffer from medicines, administered gastric medications and sedatives, and changed the food for several days, improved significantly in the nutrition.
And cut off the top of the womb, and cauterize that part with a cauterization on the side of the head next to the previous hand, and another cauterization on the occipital bone of the head, and over every corner of the head it should be cauterized. And if the womb is strong and tolerant, you cauterize that part with the cauterizations I have mentioned, with almost paralysis and softening of the chest over the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
If the cauterization is followed by oil.
If the patient is young, then stop cauterization with this hand.
Capitol, Chapter 11.
Of cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are cold and corrupt humors that have become large and flaccid, then cauterize those parts with the cauterizations that have been mentioned for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity that becomes melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then give him this ointment that cleanses the brain according to what was given before in the division.
And shave the head of the patient, and make a circular cut around it, and then place it in the appropriate location of the head.
And if the patient is sixty years old and is held by the whole body.
And then apply the liniment; and it is worthy of being bound with ancient wool. And heat that over the fire, with gentle heat according to measure, which the sufferer endures when it is near to him. When it is necessary to apply heat to the head of the patient in the circle, and let it enter until it is warm.
And apply a poultice to the thigh for the entire week, or in another treatment of the bowel that enters when it is healthy; or if you prefer, make small points on the skin according to the smallest part of the bowel, unless you have a ready-made cauterant: this is a special kind of cauterization that hydrates the brain equally.
And stop that hair from growing on the border or in the gray areas of the scalp.
Chapter 12.
Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
When you are declared the beginning of water in the heel by the sailors who I have told you about in the division, then begin and give it to the head of the patient with your hand on the bow, and hold that over all the moisture.
And make that saturate in water for a few days.
And order that the patient raise his head, and cauterize that with the cauterant on the designated location of the head; and if it is the beginning of the water in two heels, or in one heel if the water comes from two heels, or in one heel if the water comes from one heel.
When you cut all the veins and arteries that are left in the abdomen; and these cauteries are in the lower part of the temperature of the templates.
And keep track of the fluids that come out when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluids coming out, take some of the medicine that is available to you.
And you will know what is extracted from the arteries and the abscess of those and the caution of the fluids.
And some are cauterized in the cervix, with two bones on each of the two cauteries produced differently.
Capitol.xiii. (This is a page number or section heading
Of the cauterization of ancient tears. (This sentence seems to be discussing the use of cauterization in treating eye problems
When the tears of the eyes are naturally and through the veins and arteries that are in the location manifestation of the head deformed and it is observed that this is superfluous fleshy flaps, then you cauterize that with the cauterization of the one that has been found in the beginning of the water that is stuck in the eyes, and you cauterize in the middle of the head and you have two cauteries in the cervix and you have two cauteries on the bones. (This sentence seems to be providing instructions for treating eye problems using cauterization) If you need to add something, then make points on the entire length of the horse's tail over the tip of the little cautery.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization of nasal odor.
When you are treating that which has been said in the division and does not benefit from your medication, then show yourself and give to the thighs of the patient three knots; and take the head of the patient, and cauterize the small cauterization with an olive-colored cauterization. And then cauterize that small cauterization with the olive-colored cauterization on the two tips of the thighs, and cut the hair a little.
And keep away from the archery that you did not burn that one.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
Chapter 15.
Of cauterization of softening of the eyelids of the horses.
When the eyelid of the horse is softened by lack or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cauterization on this cauterization; and this is the form of it:
If you, make an incision on that side of the two thighs with a small piece of cauterization, and make the incisions long enough for the timepieces. And the length of each cauterization is according to the amount of thigh.
And do not press too hard with your needle, but according to the amount that the last part of the eyelid is thin.
Capitulum .xvi.
Of the cauterization of the eyelid of the cat when the whiskers are converted into parts of the fingers and thumb of the cat.
When the whiskers of the cat are converted into parts of the fingers and thumb of the cat, make an incision in those with two hands, four cauterizations or as much as possible, or with medical fire.
If you want to cauterize with fire, command the cat to sit down and look at its whiskers as if they were those of a human, and if the cat's paws are prolonged and engulfed; and if you need to hold the cat's paw, stretch your thumb over it with something that is not hurtful to the whiskers of the cat if they were born.
When a person is born and begins to cry, you should stop the mouth of the child in the middle of the nose, and cover the eyes of the crying child with your hand, and then say to it, "This is like the figure of a dead fox, and this is the beginning of the speech from your father.
And then put a stopper in the bottle or in a jar over the hazelnut.
And light the cautery that this is the form of the fire.
And cauterize on the figure that you have covered, little by little, in circular motions, until the surface of the skin is burned like a candle, and it appears completely properly.
And say to the patient that the health of the second work is that you see the eyelid already closed and the eyes of the child raised, you must make a puncture in the hazelnut.
And then raise your hand and leave it there for three minutes, and cover the bottle with your hand when the heat is produced. And care for that am as soon as it is healed.
When the catheter returns to the eyes for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then make another cut on that same spot as you did initially.
If the catheter is in the eyelid, then make a cut inside that part which is raised to the natural location and is engaged and does not touch the eyebrow.
The cauterization in medicine is this that you command on the thigh which the eyelids enter that are prolonged and engaged, and it should be made on a piece of paper in the shape of a bird's beak.
And take some cotton and live coal and apply it to the inside of the eyelid. And, or rather, and mix those causes with it, and make it a paste for you to use when it is not hot; and spread that over the paper which is made in the shape of a bird's beak, and place that over the other eyelid; and place the eyelid cutter in the album of the hand, and the head of the thigh should be at the top.
When the doctor pauses about medicine and asks for a small amount of medicine, that small amount is placed in the mouth, as if from fire.
Then, when the patient perceives that the pain is relieved, you apply the medicine and moisten the mouth with that; then, when the pain ceases, you remove the medicine from the mouth and wash your eyes with water; and you consider whether the eyelid has been removed in the same way as it is washed with hot or cold water, which is best; and if not, return to the medicine to the place where it has not been applied before and does not damage the operation and does not spoil the cheek.
And then stop over the edge of the wound that has been cut out, and cure that which is inflamed or otherwise, according to what is healthy.
And if it is necessary for you to do your operation, you must guard it with the diligence that is required in the mouth, and if the eyelid is not falling down and there is no cause for the piles in the mouth, you should repeat your medicine over that part of the eyelid that is being softened, and return to what you have done at the beginning, and enter when it is cured.
This is the form of the fumet of the martyr.
You know that the pulses of men vary according to their size and thickness, and therefore, according to this, your contraction is made.
And do not make haste in the path of rectum to that to which you are studying in this art.
Chapter 17.
Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you cure fistula as they have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not confirm your cure, then you should cauterize according to this manner: command the patient to hold their head in the highest position, and hold the head of the patient between their hands in such a way that it is not painful nor agitates the head.
And then pause the cauterization in the album of the hool or on the mucilage of ptilli over the hool of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterization that this is the form:
that is cured, it is like a cane or a pen of the tail, from one end to the other where the cauterization is made.
If you please, pierce it through to the other end. If you want to be sure of the result, try it.
However, it is better to consult a specialist than to rely on the second operation.
When the fistula is properly closed and there is an opening for the sore and drying, then... If it is not closed, open it and remove the wound of the leg.
Then place the cautery over it that is not ignited, and take a little of the cautery from the heel to the tip of the nose, so that your hand does not hurt and the patient's thigh is quieted, and then place the cautery on the heel and smear it with that.
And if the beginning of the cauterization goes into the bone, it is; and otherwise, you must repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and then leave it there for three days, and place your hand over it to border and envy it until it is dry and healthy.
If it has been passing for many days and is not cured, then you must stop the acute, corrosive medicine and enter the bone when it is discovered and is rough second according to the caput.
And there is another kind of cauterization for the fistula that the first ones have discovered: go to the location of the fistula and open it and pause in that subtle fissure where the form of the fistula is; and take a quantity of one unc of the plum fundut; and then put your hand on it with good retention, and do not make the thigh bad for so that the plum fundut does not reach the heel of that; and cover that over the heel of the thigh with albumin or water, four plums adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it for wonderful cure.
If the fistula is cured by this treatment and cauterization, then so be it; otherwise, you must administer enemas and reduce the fistula to the abdomen according to its location in their place.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
Of cauterization of the fissure, it can be.
When visible blisters occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
And how you cure those fissures as they have been told in the divisions and do not waste your care, if you do not know the cauterization small cautery according to this form that is used:
And let the cavity be according to the subtlety of the cotilla.
Then pause that intestine immediately when this cauterization comes to those fissures.
And then cure that as soon as it is healthy.
Chapter 19.
Of the cauterization of the fistula in the mouth.
When the uvula or palate or the corners of the teeth are infected and it bursts, and it becomes inflamed, and a fistula forms, and you cure that and do not waste your care, if you do not know the cauterization according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and you place that fire in the mouth of the fistula, and when the red fire reaches the prey of the mouth and the cheek, you make a wound or two; and you cure that as they have told us of the cure when it is healthy.
When the abscess is removed and healed, so be it; and if not, you must discover the location and harm the corrupted bones according to what will appear in their capital.
The first source sentence is "Capitol.xx." which is
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas." translates to "Of the cauterization of the teeth and the mollification of the ankles.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantemente, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda." translates to "When the ankles are softened by moisture and the teeth are rough, and these are treated with medicines that do not cure, then you should place the head of the patient's foot on the ground, and carefully ignite the cauterization in the form that will be most appropriate, as if you were to put the burning cauterization near the tooth and enter it into the mouth of the patient, so that the heat of the fire may reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols." translates to "And take your tool, and then make the cauterization some cuts according to what you want.
And if the patient's mouth opens to drink salty water and holds it for an hour, and it is observed that the tooth is closed and the gum is strengthened and the moisture is dried out.
Capitol Section 21.
Of cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or in it is frostbite, or vermin, or the patient does not respond to medical care, then you should cauterize on that spot with two hands: either with cow hide, or with fire.
Cauterization with cow hide is that you take the skin of the cow and burn it in the iron cauldron, and then cut and wrap it around the extremity of the tooth, and then press it firmly on the painful tooth while it is cold.
And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, immerse wool or hide in the skin of that part, and press it on the painful tooth, and press it on that fire that is ignited until it reaches the neck of the cavity of the tooth.
When it comes to cauterization, it is important that you attend to the part that is either made of bone or iron, and there should be any flesh in the body and the sharpness of the iron does not reach the mouth of the wound.
Then, carefully observe the form of the cauterant that will be used, and place it on the tooth and enter with your hand into that cauterant if it is hot; and make some observations to see if the pain remains or in that day or the next day.
And make sure that by pressure of that cauterant the wound of the patient closes the mouth of good border and holds it for an hour and removes the; and this is the form of the cauterant.
And cauterize as you see fit, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
On the cauterization of extremities.
When the extremities are flexible and of cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines and you see that the digestion is only slightly affected, then carefully observe the form of this cauterant as follows: two ends should be set up for the smoke to rise from the other end, and place the ignited cauterant on the wound, and if necessary, enter with your hand into the wound to see if it reaches the point of the wound.
If the fester does not increase much, stop the cauterization according to the amount of the fester, and then leave it for three days and press on the wound entrance with a cloth soaked in cool water as often as necessary to prevent it from becoming too moist.
And then care for that wound and try to dry it out and dress it as often as necessary to make it heal.
Capitulum .xxiii. (Chapter 23)
Of cauterization of rheumatism and constriction of the throat.
When humors increase over the bronchus of the lung, and more so when there is coldness of the chest, you should make the patient take laxatives at the beginning of medicine, and then cauterize that point on the gallbladder in the area where it is damaged.
And be careful not to get burned at the gallbladder or not char on the colon of the patient but only a little.
And you should cauterize that point with another cauterization at the joint of the knee in the lower spine of the patient. The first line of the text translates to "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." The second line, "E·l cauteri
The text translates to "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out." The second line, "E·l
This line appears to be a page number, indicating that this text is part of a larger
The text translates to "Of cauterization for the lung and chest of the patient." The second line, "De cauterizacio de malautia del pul
The text translates to "When the chest and lung are affected by dampness and the patient does not have fever or chill and it is an old form of asthma, then cauterize that part with two cauters on the shoulder in the places where the wings and belly are separated; and another cauterization in the midst of the chest between two milks; and let the cauters be pointed according to the previous form." The second line, "Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua" translates to "When the chest and lung are affected by dampness and the patient does not have fever or chill and it is an old form of asthma." The third line, "lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz" translates to "then cauterize that part with two
If you wish, let your cauterization be made with points on the cautery that is called a point, in the form of which you precede in the pain of gout.
And if points are made inside the skin, and it is important to care for that as it was done before when it was sick.
And if the cautery has three corners for this cauterization, you can make three cauterizations following this form:
Chapter 25.
Of the cauterization of the helper's elbow.
When the elbow of the helper is dislocated due to humid, slippery substances and does not stop at the time of returning to its original position, and it must be moved slightly in the direction in which it was, as we have seen, the first reductions of the dislocation were reduced, and the foot is returned to the opposite side or to the latz; and then raise the collar that is in the part where the elbow is dislocated, if the joint is dislocated in the parts of the wrist.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:
When it is necessary to cauterize the cord that penetrates into the other part of the lock, and one finds the figure of cauterization with four caps of cauterization.
And some threads are adjusted according to this count and those are the cauteries.
Then stop over the cauterization point with something warm, and make the hernia adhere to the wound, and the member will not be harmed for a while until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is in parts and tart, then cauterize over the muscle that is to be cauterized, either the clavicle or the point of the cauterization, where the joint is confirmed and the humidity is moistened and the hernia is healed.
Chapter 26.
On cauterization of the stomach.
When pain is felt in the stomach and humors of moisture come out, and if you continue the cures and do not confirm, then you know that the hernia is on the left side, and extend your hands and legs and cauterize with three cauteries: one cauterization for the quantity of a certain clavicle cauterization, and two cauterizations for the two costals near the cauterization, until the figure of the triangular cauterization is found; and elongate those that are not adjusted to make a cut.
If the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two-thirds of the length of the spine of the back.
And if the figure of the cauterization is this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And if the stomach is cauterized with points at that which of this cauterization is frightening: and you should place your hand over the stomach according to the quantity you want, and cauterize those points according to the cauterization; and cure that wound with the cure that has been previously done before it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of cauterization of the gouty toe.
When the pain in the gouty toe increases due to coldness or wetness or large viscosity within which the normal part of the foot is gotten out by excess exudation, and the thigh is cured as they have said and does not comfort, you should place the thigh over the knee of the patient, and then cauterize three times according to this form and this quantity on the gouty toe after the hip bones, so that the decubitus of the patient is covered.
When the space is equal to the size of the largest part of the body that is being treated with the cautery, and the cautery is placed along the length of the body.
And do not understand your amusement at the cautery tool.
And if the amount of water that is added is equal to the amount of the matured meat of the intestine, and it is not adjusted; and if the thigh is resting on the foot of the patient; and if not, then the patient should be lying down, having extended his legs, and raised his arms.
And are you able to use these cauteries as cautries, when you have the subtlety and prudence in the art?
And be careful not to overprocess in the cauterization, and add enough meat to the entire intestine so that it is throughout the entire body and passes through the feet, where the intestine is thin; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Regarding the perforation of the plaster on the patient by the cautory.
When an inflammation or abscess appears on the foot and one wishes to know if this abscess is in the flesh or in the skin, if it is in the flesh, the foot becomes heavy and painful at its tip.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain is sharp and often exhausts the doctors' care for the patient.
Therefore, the thigh should be covered with the blanket over the hip bone; and then mark the location of the abscess that is about to appear; and then use the cautery that is suitable for the size, the form of which is described in the next page. And cauterize that and cauterize inside when the whole coat is burned, inside when it reaches the cistern, inside when it goes to the sinus.
And care for that by treating the other abscesses inside when it is cured.
However, this method of cauterization is not used except for that which is studied in the art of medicine to prolong life and cure many diseases; but this has been experimented on some cases where it was ardent about this operation, but rather it is necessary for us and it is useful.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
The translation of "De cauterizacio de plauresi" is "On the cauterization of warts
The translation of "Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit." is:
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When you do not have a prescription for your pain, it is not recommended to use home remedies or over-the-counter medications without consulting a healthcare professional. It is important to seek medical attention if you experience persistent pain or other symptoms.
It is known that some men use iron cauteries resembling rays and ignites in the area between the ribs, and if they penetrate into the lung and cause an abscess to be expelled outside the body, it is said in the postmortem of the patient.
In this cauterization, there is no fear of injury, as it often occurs in the location where it is not possible to be cured.
Conclusion: In this medieval medical treatise, the author
From the cauterization of the gallbladder.
When you cure the gallbladder disease, it is said that the cure is made in the division and not to confirm your cure, you perform cauterization on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of them is to make three cauterizations or four lines according to the length of the gallbladder according to the figure of the cauterizations of the patient, the figure of which has preceded.
When there is a need to place the point between any cauterization and the largest part of a given or few pieces, and the hand of the cauterization is the same hand that has been mentioned in the cauterization of the engaged piece.
You do not understand your own, but I understand the cauterization; and the thigh should be covered over the desired part.
And if another hand is to cauterize, it is because you do not understand the cauterization, which has caused the lack of two vertiments, which have been said in the capital of muscle dislocation, and the elava codena which is in the endreyt of the table for the jazer of the left thigh.
And if your elevation is of the one that raises the codena according to the length of the body, because there are cauterizations according to the latitude of the cost.
And if you enter the two vertiments, ignis, mindfully, in that entrance where those penetrate the codena of the other part.
And then remove the cauterization; and it is four cauterizations.
If you are, use a cautery with three points.
And if you carefully apply the cautery, so that it lies flat against the skin for a long time, it will be as comfortable as the previous causes in treatment.
Capitol.xxxi.
Of cauterization of gout.
Cauterization is not used in gout, but in other diseases actually.
When you treat gout with the medicines of curing that have been said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then you find that this cauterization uses four cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the back, and two on the spine, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is proper to the spice of the ribs.
And place the cauterizations carefully, so that they lie flat against the skin for a long time.
When the surgery is completed with the hot iron as it should be, and the wounds are closed, and quickly help the patient to recover from the illness.
The form of the cautery is determined by what is being cauterized, whether it is the abdomen or the two thighs, according to the previous form, and that is the one used for that.
Chapter XXXII.
Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with stagnant water, it is customary to cauterize the feet on the back of the thigh in the same way as the ear and anus, and lift your hand away from the cauterization tool without pulling on it; and then lift your hand, and do not return to that position, for the stagnant water will not subside.
The cautery is done according to this form: On each thigh, make two points of cauterization, and in each point, make a cut at the end of the cauterization tool. When making the incision, follow the length of the thigh: and on one side, remove the denuded part and on the other side, make the incision in the middle of the thigh; and over each thigh, place two incisions.
And keep the wound clean for a long time because some pus may come out of it.
And cure the wound with those causes that have been said.
Chapter 33.
On cauterization of abdominal parts.
When abdominal parts are affected by cold humors that cause the belly to become thin, it is the digestive and retentive vertutes that are affected, which are in the stomach and intestines, and should be cured with the help of medical attendants and not confined, and sometimes the abdomen suffers cauterization of the vertutes exposed, then make a large cauterization on the upper stomach according to the previous cauterization of the stomach, on the cauterization of the circle, and four cauterizations in the subtle circuit of the emblac, on the clavilh subtle; and make cauterizations over the alcatin on great aloys, or two cauterizations.
If the humors are excessive and the body tolerates it, then make incisions on the penis and intestines, and adjust two incisions on the stomach and lower abdomen, which is a perfect cure for the recovery of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv. is a Roman numeral that corresponds to the
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas. is a Latin phrase that translates to "Of the cauterization of anc
When ancient gouty or fat humors or corrupt humors are found in nature, and they are cured as said in the division and not confirming the second cure, then make incisions on the spine of the two small and small triangular bones, and make cauterizations on the omentum pouch by two points.
And if the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient sometimes bleeds, then make incisions on the stomach with a large cauterization that is preceded; and a cauterization on the thigh, and another cauterization on the abdomen, and let the cauterization be cleaned for some time, and cure it when it is healthy.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
From cauterization of the hernia, appropriate the abscess of it.
When you cut a bone, you should use the cautery that is assembled in the ray. Place that cautery in the cut bone, and then insert the second piece, making sure it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And if you find any wounds or sores, then cauterize each of them the second time that they have been cleaned, and take care of those that are most affected by the burns as soon as they are healed.
And if you cauterize a large part of the skin with one cauterization, it is less effective in healing.
Capital.6.
Of cauterization of pistols that are found in nature, it is said in the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it is healed by cauterization.
Therefore, when someone finds a pistol in nature that is old and corrupted by sain and humidity, and then it is right to say that the cover should be placed on that which is subtle, and approach the quantity of its depth in front of the mentioned tent.
In this case, "aprop igneys" seems to be a typo or a word that doesn't exist in the language used in the treatise. However, "le Then apply that lit cauter to this fistula, and according to the quantity needed to close it.
When you iterate over that area with the cautery, if those corrupted corpses are only slightly burned or two or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And keep an eye on the combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, keep an eye on all those places; and do not touch it unless the fistula is in a place that is not penetrating.
And apply care to the area that has been cured.
If the wound is sealed and all materials have been removed, and there are no signs for a long time, you know that it has been cured completely.
If the materials are not of the patient's own, you know that they penetrate or in the pre-on of the body, they corrupt, or they cause this to happen for those causes that will be remembered in that place.
Capitol Chapter xxxvii.
Of the cauterization of the horn.
When in the horn there is pain from cold or great ventilation, and if the hand of the patient is sweating, you know that it should be cauterized over the horn with a pointed cautery on each horn with a clavicle that remembers.
When it is necessary to make points on the second part of the body, then three lines of cauterization are made, and more points can be made in the future.
Capitol Chapter 38.
Of cauterization of the vagina.
When inflammation occurs in the vagina and it becomes soft and moist due to urine, then it is necessary to cauterize that part with a pointed cautery on the side of the vagina, starting from the vaginal opening, and then another cauterization is made on the opposite side.
And the length of each cauterization is according to the amount of urine; and it is cauterized at that point on the lower side of the vagina, or two cauterizations if necessary.
And the cauterization is made according to how it is processed.
Capitol Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the clitoris.
When inflammation occurs in the clitoris and it becomes soft and moist due to urine, and circumcision is prohibited, and the menstrual flow of the woman is corrupted, and the provocation of the women is delayed, and pain occurs in their region, then it is necessary to cauterize that part with three cauterizations around the umbilicus, as has been said in the cauterization of the vagina; and it is cauterized on the lower side of the two, or two cauterizations, and the clitoris is also cauterized.
The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treat
ion, specifically about the treatment of a dislocated ankle (ankle) using cauterization. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
When humors become moist and infiltrate the joint of the ankle, and this causes pain in the surrounding area, and it is said that the thigh is extended over the other when compared to it. And the location of the displacement becomes thin in that way.
However, if you have to cauterize the thigh over the ankle of the patient using the pointed cautery, as it seems, you will have to be careful in the circle of the ankle where it revolves, and for that reason, the ankle falls into the center of the circle.
And this cauterization is the one that precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not at your disposal, you can cauterize that with the large cauterizing olive.
And the point of cauterization is according to the amount of the spleen's dissection; and it is cared for that one enters when it is healthy.
Chapter 41.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the knee joint, and its cause is cold humors, the thigh is treated with this, which has been called and not confined, and it is antiquated, and you must cut off the thigh from the gross humors that are either pills made of animal products or artificial pills or semblances; and then cauterize that.
The hand of the cauterization is followed by two hands: either a cauterization made with burning medicines, or a cauterization made with fire.
Then follow two scientific hands: one of which is the one that cauterizes it over the knee joint, and the other three cauterizations are made in this form; and they make good depth. And if the space between each cauterization is the quantity of the grossness of the one and if the cauterization is small or large.
There are some who see that the cauterization is over the middle of the head of the ankle for which there are four cauterizations.
And if you want, cauterize at the circle that is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and which is a continuous and burning circle and cuts through the entire chain.
This is the manicure of cauterization in cases where pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend beyond the thigh.
If the wound is extended to the thigh, then make incisions on both sides of the thigh at the location where the evil will enter the body that causes pain; and make a cut on the cavity with four nails about a quarter of an inch long for the part that is most affected.
If the incision is made with a scalpel, and the depth of the incision depends on the amount of spinal fluid.
If the evil enters the body and the pain is extended to the location where it entered, then make incisions there with the scalpel, and if necessary, make three or four or more cuts on that part.
If the evil causes pain to be felt further down the thigh, then make incisions there with the scalpel at the location where the pain is felt.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not use the scalpel as a nerve or large artery, and that for this reason you may cause the patient to have a bad outcome or contraction.
And you have already seen one and another of those which were cauterized on the cavity and later in the cauterization, and the bed was inflamed within which the tumor achieved the foot, and the focus was burned and corrupted throughout the foot. When a sudden and severe pain in the stomach occurs, it may be a sign of impending death.
If the pain is in two parts, and each part is cauterized on this manier, then...
Different types of cauteries are used in this manier of cauterization: they resemble a circle of iron, the circumference of which is the largest part of a palm; and it is necessary to use the greatest force according to the size of a shoulder or a small bone.
The circle is then made another part; and the space between them is equal to the quantity of the notch of the point; and these circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those circles is a notch or two notches, and they are made in the points of iron decently; and this is the form of it:
A fire is then placed in the furnace when it is closed and gives off sparks, and it is placed over the joint of the thigh, the leg covered with cloth. And this cauterizes the point three times using a needle.
When the patient lies down for three days, applies the plaster to the affected area and covers it with a damp cloth every day, and takes care to keep it clean inside.
Albucasis: Oh, children, of this type of cauterization few have used out of fear of the observation of it, and because few have found those who observe over it.
More of the boils on the patient who suffers from them, and they disappear from that place.
More cauterization is used by doctors that you make two circles, not perforated in the one where the guzzle of the gate of iron is, whether the length of the legs in their youth is two noses or three fingers.
And if the space between the quantity of the growth of that is; and they are opened further and further, and they contain some between them in this form.
Then stop over the part of the ankle where the patient suffers, and take your hand over the part of the ankle; and then draw water from the tail and pour it between two circles, and that quality of that is as small as possible, and take that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the pain in the mouth and throat — that pain disappears like fire — when the pain ceases.
When raising your hand with the instrument, avoid touching the entire wound with the pus.
Stretch it three times and place your hand on the border that is the remaining part of the adhesion, stretch it again for a few days, and run your fingers along the incision; this will improve with time.
Treat that area as soon as it is healed.
If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a statue of that part where pus is found, according to what is made in the wound closure.
This is the pus statue, and I have already written about this in the book on medical rectification. Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguishing caustic soda, and cut it into pieces and place them in a new wave, with the part left being perforated by a small tube, according to the amount that enters the ring.
Then take the fountains of the other wave and place them over the live alkaline and caustic soda water, which requires two for each, and understand that those are for the tieua but for good compression, and stretch the hole that comes from the sharp water in the part left in the other wave.
And adjust that water to that heat, and pour it over another part of the body, and another alkali is added, so that that pain subsides, which is maintained in operations of medicine and cauterization of other parts, which operation is like fire.
And some of the medicines are some that are cauterized wide, as it is with the essence and the meal of the acacia, and causes a hardness in some that are mixed.
And Guy narrates of an old man who underwent that operation and cure, and magnifies the effect of that, and says that no other cure is needed, and that he was cured by a bath called Aqua Gualia, which is made with the essence and meal of the acacia, and knows the effect of that.
And if it is near a certain herb, and if it is not dry, then it is held by the tail; and if it is cut into a few gray hairs, and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the chest, and it is observed.
When the pain is of three hours or the amount that the patient has lost due to the disease, it is necessary to relieve the pain.
Then put the ointment on and when the body of the patient is wrapped, enter the ointment into the body, and the pain will cease and become healthy.
You know that it is not necessary to use cauterization in these remedies except for the evacuation of the abdomen.
I have already heard that when the vena stretica is cauterized with a goat's gut, it is more effective; and this is how the cauterization should be done according to this method: hold the lana with one hand and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And hold the dry and inflamed goat's gut between the foot and the wound, and place it on the lana and stretch it over the lana. And continue this, and do not stop until the tingling sensation from the bite disappears in the ankle and relieves the pain.
This manufacturing process for cauterization is called cauterization of quills.
Capitol, Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of joint pain.
Sometimes pain is in the joint due to multiple causes such as inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to those, by infusion of wet and humid matter.
And cauterization does not work only in this single case, but rather for the effusion of wet and humid matter.
Therefore, in case of excessive evacuation of the thighs, it is appropriate to use pills fitted to their shape and appearance, which are points on the foot where the pain is three lines along the latitude of the joint, and then cauterize or not, according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate and the virtue of the thigh.
And it is a fact that cauterization is done with cauterization of points.
And if you want, cauterize by three or four cauterizations, or by the middle clavicle according to this form:
I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for the source sentence
From cauterization at the beginning of gilbositat.
When swelling is present in the joints of the children's feet, and the beginning of this ailment is felt over their structure in the ankle and elevation and movement.
When the lower back of the body begins to overarch, causing pain in the other vertebrae, it is called scoliosis.
When you see this and want to stop it, then cut that part of the cautery that is circular in this form: and hold the cautery over the entire vertebra.
And if you want, cut around the vertebra with the cautery of two or three points. And the points should be between them.
And treat the area that is healthy and has been said to be cured.
May you remember that cauterization should not be administered in inflammation that is caused by muscle spasm.
Chapter 45.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And how is gout treated by cold humors with no relief of pain, and then cut the cauterization.
It is necessary that you cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with the pointed cautery.
And is this the form of the olive oil for cauterization?
If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain pierces into the joints or other joints, and it moves to the surrounding areas, then you should cauterize that on each joint with three or four points of this olive oil cautery.
If these cauterizations are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand, just to avoid damaging the specific area of the tendon.
If the pain reaches the second joint, then apply the cauterization that was said in the capital.
If the pain is in the most part, and it is called sugar, then make points on the circumference of the joints as they revolve, make points on those two lines.
If the pain remains in the following parts, then make points around the neck of the nail on each nail and on the tip of the toe.
If the pain persists in the hips or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the helper's thighs.
And if you do not remove the bad regimen and the reception of medicines, then if it is good regimen and flat it will be removed from this cauterization, may God help.
Chapter 45.
Of cauterization of wounds.
When the wound is in the ankles and the intestines are coming out of the hernia into the abdomen, and then you should lay down the following: let the patient fast for one day, and use gentle remedies for so that the needle does not come out of the abdominal cavity.
And then follow the patient with your hands over the abdomen, and command the patient to hold the abdomen until it is flat or the hernia appears or the intestines.
And then return that to the thighs as you attempt to break through the bones of the femoral head and mark the end of which appears to be the circle of the gout in the subcutaneous parts of the body.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Then enter when the point is rough and sharp. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then pause the cautery on that part, and if you have the drill with the pointed cautery, and enter when you can find the nut of the pentenilh inside the hinge; and do the same for another try if you haven't succeeded in the first try.
And observe wisely of the intestine during your cauterization, that you do not burn that intestine because it is located over the thigh and does not come out of death or other great misfortune.
And you know that when you have the cautery, do not forget the bones, and your operation will not be successful.
E if the cauterization of children is not done with great care according to their size and measure.
And keep the area of the cauterization for three days, so that the burn of the fire is not too harsh.
And keep it for the other ingredients to enter when it is healthy.
And the patient should lie on their stomach for ten days after sealing the wound and applying plaster.
And be sure to reduce the nutrition according to the length of time the patient's cure takes, and the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And when you want to leave for three days, administer appropriate doses of medicine gently, and hold onto it for another three days.
And the labor and diet of the patient, as well as the baths, should be moderate, and the treatments should be severe, when using this entire regimen of medicine, the patient will become healthy.
And you direct the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and as at the beginning, and want that they do not come out, then cauterize the rupture with the same instrument according to its quantity, and it should be exhumed from the abdomen like the last part of the stomach; and keep the one that has been said and do not adjust.
When the first injury has been treated, it is customary to cauterize the area with a triangular point following this form, as it is recommended.
And then another line is placed along the latitude in the latex, following the curve of the rupture, and another line at the end; and then a clavicle cauterization is made, which is better than the first one that was placed further away.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization of the spine.
When pain persists in any member due to inflammation or percussion and does not relieve for a long time and does not satisfy the doctor's treatment, it is necessary to cauterize with a point.
And the cauterization of each member should be according to its magnitude and smallness, its veins and nerves, and the location of the spine and the pain in the member.
If the patient is cured by the first cauterization, it is; and if not, you should repeat the cauterization over it; four out of five of those pains are punctures from one member to another, for which you must cover that you can achieve them after the member has been cured.
The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a
De cauterizacio de lepra. This line translates to "Of cauterization of lepro
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, and less so for the specific leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flax and melancholy. This line translates to "Some boils are treated with cauterization due to great benefit, but less so for the specific leprosy caused by the putrefaction of flax and melancholy.
When you want to cauterize that part, consider if leprosy is present and if it has been cured as they have said in the division and not here, nor there, and fear for the thighs that corruption understands the entire body of him and all the composition of him, then cauterize that over the head with a point: one in the middle of the forehead, and one further down from there, and press it towards the tip of the nose; and two on the temples or servants.
And finally, the last thing you should do is that the cauterization is made a little further in the bone when it begins to press on the gout, and the legs are displaced, because the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize over the table second that is required.
And if leprosy has already expanded over the thighs and manifestly appears, then you should cover that it is cauterized as those have been said in the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two on the temples or servants, and two on the collarbones, and two on the spine, and one over the spine of the back, and one over the chest, and one over the shoulders, and one over each shoulder blade, and one over each elbow, and one over each wrist, and one over each tendon, and one over every muscle, and two over each joint of the thighs and feet, and on every toe of the feet, and on every finger of the hands.
When you guard the nerves that are over the sole that does not burn those.
And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery over the bones of the patella and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the thigh.
And you know that the fewer points are cauterized, the less beneficial and less effective; and you know that the thigh does not cause pain in the cauterization, do it as they have them, so that the body of the patient has already been stunned.
And know that the points are large or few according to the members and joints according to which they are preceded by the species of the tools.
And properly care for the cauterization with flour of errors cut with wax and the other cure when it is healthy.
Chapter 48.
Of cauterization for stupefaction.
When a member is stunned or falls asleep and is treated by medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not become healthy, then you should cauterize that stunned member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
When the hot iron is inserted into the body's wound a little. Then treat that area as soon as it becomes healthy.
Some veins are cauterized with a certain stupor that ends in the more or less feet, and in the vertebrae of both sides, and one sees the excitement of the nerves which move that member, and it is reinforced with stupor.
This should not be pressed on except for that which is known about the anatomy of the member and the exit of the nerves that move the entire body.
Chapter 49.
Of cauterization of boils that become gangrenous.
When boils are old and do not respond to the treatment of medicine, then you should cauterize over that area with a certain stupor. Afterwards, cut a small piece of the body's wound and see if the white and color of the boil change. The color of the boil will change.
And treat that area with flour and lentils of red olive and leaves of arnica, and a piece of saffron or a piece of iron, each part is a piece and all are mixed, and place a cloth over it and hold it in place until it becomes healthy.
The first line "Capitol .l." is not in a
De cauterizacio de cranc" translates to "Of the cauterization of the
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut" translates to "When cancer begins and you want that part, you cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the circle of the skin where it rolls.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas" translates to "And I have seen that the part that was cauterized with the pointed cautery in the local area is not visible, but there are fears that it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen some wounds.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris" translates to "And it is better that the part is cauterized in the circle of the skin where we have said, or at the end of the cauterization.
The line "Capitol .li." is not in English and
De cauterizacio de adubilati" translates to "Of the cauterization of adulter
When some dough is slow in maturation, and this happens due to the excess of ingredients or because the meat is old, dry, or due to time, and you want to speed up the maturation of the dough; then cauterize around that part with a small point of cautery; and let it rest until it matures.
If you want to make a hole in the dough with cautery, then you should know the type of cautery that this is and slowly advance it into the dough once it penetrates the casing.
And if the cautery is placed in that place where it was put out, because the arm of the bracelet is swollen; and take care of that after it becomes normal.
Chapter 22.
Of the cauterization of corrosions.
A corrosion is an ambulating corruption in the member that consumes it like fire eats dry wood.
If you sometimes make the corrosion burn in that place where it suffered cauterization like fire, then you should know that you use small cautery points and large ones according to the place where the corrosions are.
When it comes to completely cauterizing that part within which the inflammation has spread and does not cause any harm to him.
After three days, it is advisable to pause over the cauterized areas for a short time, taking oil mixed with herbs that completely eradicates all wounds and corruption.
And treat that part with an ointment that stops the growth of flesh.
If the flesh rises three times in the area where there is no corruption, then it is done; otherwise, continue to cauterize over the area that is rotting in the affected areas.
And if they are rotten, some medical herbs can be applied to the affected area, as that is the place for cauterization. However, cauterization should not be done too often, as it may cause harm.
And I have already mentioned the treatment of the patient's acute medicine in division, and then take that when the disease arises.
Chapter 33.
Of cauterization of claws and other similar parts.
Wounds are often found in the parts of the foot that have been clawed, and they are large, deep, and cause pain to the foot; and cauterization is done on those parts with two hands, either with fire or with a hot knife.
When a cauterizing iron is hot, it should be heated similarly to the heat of a forge, which is made of iron according to the amount that contains the key of all parts, and is of thin strips.
Then stop the heat on the key, and rotate your hand over the cauterizing iron while it passes through the key until the cauterizing iron reaches the depth of the key. And let it remain for three days after it begins to blister. And apply the plaster with honey-soaked salves, and let it remain on that for a day or two, until that is completely removed from its surfaces.
And cure the wound with flesh generated after it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and visible ulcers appear on the surface of the body, mainly on the thighs and feet, then you must administer care in those cauteries that you have heated, and take a piece of iron or copper or fire-red iron, and place it over the key; and let it drip a little water into the key, and hold your hand over it, and you rotate the cauterizing iron around the compression of your hand, and press the edge of the key against the opening of the wound, and draw out the water from the preen of the wound to the opening of the claw; and wait for a while the bite of the water from the claw on the opening of the wound for an hour, and then remove it, so that the claw has its teeth completely removed from its surfaces.
When you have found the right spot, insert your hand into it and push the other parts in as well, so that all of them are inside the body.
And take care to remove those thorns that cause pain, as the flesh of the claws grows over them.
Capitulum Tertium.
Of Cautery for Trembling.
When trembling is caused by cold humors in the nerves or by fever of that nature, or by some other cause resembling it, you should know that you must cauterize that part with four or five caustics or on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a caustic; and on the stomach of the patient, and over the intestine, you should cauterize with olive oil.
And the trembling of the patient is cured and the health of the feverish state is restored quickly.
Capitulum Quartum.
Of Cautery for Accidents to the Chest.
When the chest is inflamed and has pustules that are caused by fatty materials that have become corrupt; then, at the beginning, as it appears, that part should be cauterized over the entire opening with a subtle caustic or a burning point, the extremity of which is extended to the focus, or to long-standing erestology, or with a slow cauterization.
When certain veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not surprising, and the superfluity is broken, making those healthy.
When I say that this is not an accurate translation, it means that the provided text is not a proper translation of the original medieval medical treatise. The translated text does not accurately convey the meaning of the original text.
Capitulum lv. This is Latin for "Chapter 5
De cauterizazione dei flussi di sangue accidentali causati dall'incisione dell'arto. This is Italian for "About the treatment of accidental blood flows caused by an
Troppe vaghe gocce di sangue che uscivano dall'arto richiedono un trattamento immediato. Questo può essere fatto con una puntella di cautera, o con l'incisione di apostemi, o con il cauterizzo del membro, e poi il tiro dell'altra parte della cautera per rimuovere la sanguignità. Tuttavia, questo metodo può essere difficile da eseguire e potrebbe causare ulteriori lesioni. This is Italian for "Too many drops of blood that come
Quando qualcosa di sbagliato accade, dovresti cautelare la parte coinvolta per prevenire ulteriori danni. In questo caso, dovresti costringere l'arteria con una puntella di cautera, e rimase in attesa che le vaghe gocce di sangue si esaudiscano. Una volta che la sanguignità è stata controllata, dovresti tirare l'arteria alla sua posizione originale e assicurarti che non c'è ancora sangue uscendo. This is Italian for "When something goes wrong, you should take precautions to prevent further damage. In this case, you should clamp the
And then pause in the fire a few and large cautery sticks, by name, and blow over those that are not yet ignited.
And take from those a small or a large piece of cloth and place it in the location and press on the one that has ruptured the artery, over which firmly push the said cauterizing iron until it is absorbed and held by the mentioned sand.
And if the sand expels from the orifice of the artery when you still hold the said one and remove the cauterizing iron, then take another cauterizing iron quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and so continue to do this until the sand is held.
And keep in mind that you will not burn the nerves that are here, and that another mischief will come over the thigh.
And you know that when the artery flows from the sand, you cannot hold it in the tightened sand, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four hands: by cauterizing as said has been done, or by extracting when not extracted, four when extracted are burned and held back by the sand, or that is lit by a faithful or a loyal person, or that are pressed over the medicines of those that restrict the sand; and they are tightened by the pulsion of the constriction.
This sentence seems to be discussing the administration of appropriate care for a patient with restricted movement in their limbs or chest, caused by various conditions such as tight clothing, physical injuries, or other causes. The text suggests that proper care is essential for comfort and well-being.
If there is no doctor or physician present and you must perform the operation yourself, then open the incision on the vein as they have said, and understand the great difficulty of entering that part of the body which has not been affected by the plague, and over the artery the point is not harmed; and over the artery, apply a sharp piece of wet frog to the great coldness that is in that part of the body which has been sewn up and filled out; and do not worry about whether it needs cauterization or medical attention.
Of incision and perforation and ventosias and of fleebotomy and of the plague and its like.
As has been said in the first book of all diseases in which cauterization is convenient and useful, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments required for it, and I have arranged the chapters of the subincision of the head within the feet.
When you process in this capital for that purpose, so that the patient may be happy with it, and you over it what will be asked.
And since you began thusly, son, son in law, that in this capital it is for fear of the patient that there is more cauterization in the first capital.
And for that reason, son in law, that there is great caution in the operation, which is done in this capital, it is necessary to evacuate what is seen in the vein or by incision over the aposteme or apex of exit or purification of the plague or extraction of the catarrh or incision of urine and its appearance. And of all that is accompanied by fear and trembling and in the most of them the death.
And you advise you that over you do not fall in the which is the situation, because some see that you must have men who are men and motas of diseases. And of them it is known that if you go to their disease and they see that you must have their death, and so because of the vehemence of this which finds in their disease, and because of the long time of the disease of them, and they see that the disease means death.
When those are the things that give you an idea and tell you what to expect, you should expect that the wound is serious and the misfortune of the patient is pernicious.
And do not assume that you agree with the one who shows you this maneuver; and your caution should be greater than expected and your greed; and do not presume any cause other than certain science, which confirms to you this, and by succession, praiseworthy.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases for prognosis and indication of the one that is converted to health, which is an aid to you in the acquisition of fame and memory, praiseworthy and glorious.
Oh, children, may God help you in understanding and not leave you without direction and protection, for this is in your hands.
And you ordered this chapter to be distinguished by the following chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterizations, of the care of the head entering the feet, so that you may be able to find what you asked for and of which there is a need.
The first source sentence is in Latin and can be translated as
De la curacio de aygua" means "of the treatment of urine," and "la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz" means "which is contained in the head of the children." So,
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat" means "You should know that this child's disease is caused by the lack of milk and when the nurse stretches the child's head, the life force is squeezed out." So,
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda" means "And some are caused by the lack of moisture, which is not cleaned." So,
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels" means "I have not seen this disease in children only; and in all those that I saw were threatened with death, and therefore I saw some work done in them." So,
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort" means "And I saw that the child's head was full of urine, and the child's head was totally dry, and he could not put anything on it because the greatness of the child's head did not allow it, and less so when the fire burned." So,
This humidity or is added between the ribs and the bone, or is added further on the bones over the chest.
The first source sentence to translate is: "Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am une fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:
If humidity increases and the abscess grows, then there are two incisions to make according to this method:
If the humidity reaches the skull, then you should see the commissures of the bare cap and the water is seeping when you press on it with your hand, but not at the parts of the fingers that are most sensitive to you. This means that you should cut in the corner of the head with three incisions according to this method.
This means that you should cut through the entire head with three incisions, then stretch the fissures with cloth and plaster, and apply a bandage over it and let it stay for five days, and clean the wound and sew the skin together, and tighten the cap to equality; and feed the patient with dry food within that limb that is comfortable and healthy.
This means that there is another method of incision, which is considered the best in terms of the size of the hematoma and the collection of fluid, as some veins may be less visible in the occipital region, or on the side, or on the left, or on the right; and therefore, pay attention to the incision where the hematoma and the repletion of fluid are located, and follow what is best for you.
This means that do not cut the artery and avoid causing bleeding, and do not make the patient wait for the discharge of the waste from the wound due to that flow of waste.
1. "Capitol segon" translates to "Chapter
1. "Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias" translates to "When the patient is treated with cold applications or poultices on the limbs or chest, and this is not enough, and no cure is found in this, then the following cure should be given to these two arteries.
1. "E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes" translates to "And when you want to incise the parts that the patient wants to remove, and make the incision as deep as possible in the area where the arteries are located, and consider where the vein is; and the locations of each over the locations where the aorta pulses, and they are so hidden that they only appear in a few men.
And place your hand over the artery at the point of injection, and insert the needle into every part of the joint affected by gout, and it should be located near the head of the foot.
And if you want, enter the needle through the skin and push it towards that part of the artery.
And if the length of the insertion is two to three times that of the needle, then when a vein is inserted, it should exit through pulsation and the thread should be visible, which will fracture due to frequent pulsation.
If the artery does not appear at the injection site, you should measure the circumference of the thigh and determine the quantity of three inches, and then place your hand on the point, and it should enter the bone.
And that the thread is pulled tight by the amount of one inch, and not too much or too little, and then it should be according to the quantity that appears on the thigh and the replenishment of the artery.
And if you consider the pain, and then if there is any cause for the wound to come out of the bone, you should insert it in that way so as not to cause an incision.
When the swelling is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the skin and clothing, and it is necessary to care for it, do so within the area that is affected.
Capitol .iii. is not a complete sentence and does not
Of extracting the arteries that are in the templates.
When the veins or arteries of ancient clothing are damaged by cold humors and impurities in the scales of the templates, or the old skin becomes very inflamed and resembles those, and is treated with the curative manieyras of medicinal medicine, but it does not help, we have found these maladies to be extractions of arteries from the templates, or cauterization of those parts that have been shown.
And the manieyra of the operation and extraction of those is what causes the malady to race through the parts that are in the templates; and understand that the apparent artery in the template that you have shown with your hands, and is hidden except in a few people by the vehemence of freg.
And if it is hidden from you, the col of the malady may be strengthened by some clothing; and place freg on the location where there is a dry or evaporated drap, or water cauda entro that appears to you the artery manifestly. When you take the gout, this is the form: And when you scorch the joint, this is the method: and when you get out of that, get it out through the arch; and when you get it out, get it out through the part where you extracted it, and discover the parts of those that are left in that place, from all sides.
If the artery is fine, wrap it around the end of the cord, and cut off a piece according to the number of those that are connected at the ends of the cord and are contracted, and do not let any fluid flow out, for if they are not cut, they will not be able to pull out the whole.
And then remove three drops of sweat from the body.
If the artery is large, you should cover that with two pieces of cloth or strings as far apart as possible to prevent putrefaction during the consolidation of the plague and prevent fluid from flowing out.
And then cut off the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or at another time.
If you wish, cauterize that point with the pointed cautery within the bone that has incised extramittats of it, and stay in place of that work.
And it is better work if the patient does not have fever or is not in sepsis; then cauterize those causes that help to dry the wetter ones, and therefore it is better for the cure.
And cover the extraction of the archways that hump the space of the old crotch, and are placed over the clean parts nicely, and as soon as possible apply the care of medicines to make the flesh and skin better within which is healthy.
If while you work another vein flows out of the archway, you must hold that sac with your hand or a pointed cautery, or place it on the old crotch and tighten it within which is dry the sac, and hold it well. If you do not have the cause of those things at your present, then place your hand on the side of the location where the sac is dry, and wrap the location with something wet to prevent it from being cold, and hold it strongly so that it covers.
When one is pushed into extracation of an artery, it is necessary to cauterize the vein at this cauterization with two points, so that you have seen the two locations, and then pause, not much, until they come to the bone and incut the vein in two locations, so that it is elongated as much as possible between the extremities of this, so that it is not supported by all of this cauterization.
This is the form of cauterization:
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by do However, if the pain is more severe in one joint than the other, then it is likely to be gout. If the pain is sudden and intense, and quickly spreads to the surrounding tissue, it may be a sign of gout.
Therefore, if there is any swelling in the joints, the heat of the fire should be reduced and the skin should be gently peeled off.
And this work is better than all other works and has more detail.
However, the space between the two joints is not always an indicator of the severity of the pain.
Capital quarter.
Regarding the treatment of sudden and severe gout attacks in the feet caused by acidic uric acid crystals.
When gout attacks are present and the feet swell due to inflammation of the veins over the thigh bone, and no cause for its cure can be found in medical science, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes pale and moves as if it were the front of a spider's web, and the toes become extenuated, humid, but the nails are still hard, the tears of the eyes become red due to inflammation, the old sweat is aggravated in the treatment of this operation, and many mistakes are made in the cure of this operation.
It is necessary that you command the patient to raise their knees, and then insert your three fingers three centimeters apart along the length of the front. If the length of the fissure is two inches, then the first fissure should be two inches distant from the longitud of the nose in the middle of the front, and the second should be a little further along the movement of the wrists that are in the lacrimal, and the third part.
And keep in mind the beginning of the arcets that are in two rows, and extend your hand for the continuation of the bones of the jaw. If the space of each insertion is three inches adjusted.
If you have a sponge pillow or sheet that absorbs moisture, use it to dry the wound.
And place the sponge between two sharp edges, of which this is the form of the insertion of the wound: that is from the beginning of the template to the second insertion. Exfoliate all the skin that is between two incisions and the one that is over the bone, and then make sure that the insertion moves into the second incision. And if it is necessary to enter this substance and go into the first incision of another woman's body with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and smooth on the other.
And stop the fat of that sharp instrument with the cartilage, and the edge of the leon's tooth with the bones, and press that goes into the fissure to migrate, and cut off all those vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
May it be continued of the incision to that part of the cartilage, and place it in the other fissure.
And push that quantity of liquid out, remove the locations of the sac's pits.
And stop in any fissure that has a thick hair, and stay over those powders enbegotten with oil and vinegar, and see that it does not cause an abscess.
And on the third day remove the ligament and give a large infusion of water or blood, and care for that it is cured with balsam and oil rose and others which are the plagues are healed.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in
This line seems to be discussing the treatment of gout (lagramas) and its symptoms, specifically the pain and swelling that occurs in the feet (huels). The term "dedintz" might refer to the joints or bones in the feet. Here's a possible translation:
When the joints become inflamed with gout and continue to swell, and the feet become slightly thin, and the eyes are affected by the pain, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the hair is damaged on the head, and in the crown of the head there is acute pain and inflammation due to the accidents that the materials and gout do not come from the veins of the joints but from the parts of the bones.
The best cure for this condition is to command the patient to face away from you, and then insert your hand into the opening of their front, creating a small incision in the middle of their forehead (and starting at the medial side of the right temple; and extend into the bone; and enlarge the space between the tendons of the muscles that are not visible through the fissure), once you have reached the bone.
Dry the entire area with a sponge or cloth, and then fill the gap between the two sides of the incision with cotton or strips of cloth. And then apply some powder to absorb moisture and prevent the cautery from sticking to the skin.
And when you see that the cautery has diminished, take care to remove the powder from the bone that starts at the middle of the fissure, and apply a poultice made from wheat flour, four parts of colloquium, and mescla o, and apply it to these plagues on the skin of the native tissue.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text "Capit
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas" translates to "The cure of this gout that is in the joints.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia." translates to "The total cause that gout is in the joints is one of four species, which is either mineral pebble or causes a similar appearance to a pebble, like iron and steel, or is of plant origin like nettle or fennel, or is a cause of fluxing like water and vinegar, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio." translates to "Then if pebble gout is in the joint or another similar cause does not fit or is not believed in the joint, and stops the joint to the sun, and if it sometimes shows the pebble, distillation is done on that one of those causes of oil violat or sizami, and properly administers the extraction of the same, and makes it run amend, and oppilates the patients for the outcome of the running. And then pause at the circuit of the auricle of some buttons or linen, and extend the auricle to the parts thereof, where four points are usually forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not obtained, you administer an extraction from the body with the instrument called the epigastric gauge of this type:
And if it is forgotten, then so be it; and if not, you administer the extraction of the body with a small subtle amount of duplication.
And if it is not forgotten for this, you make a cannula of aram and enter the extremity of the cannula into the opening of the auricle and close the end of the cannula with wax and ointment softened so that the cannula is not scratched except for the cannula. And then extract from the upper part of the wind that is too much attracted, where too many points have been obtained.
But if it is not forgotten in this method, you hold the hair or wool of the patient with your hand, and press the parts of the body with one hand a certain quantity, and then place that on the extremity of the ear, and gently fold over the part. When entering that part of the ear with ease, and removing the moisture from it.
And if you do not forget all the causes that have been mentioned, then make points on that line where it becomes difficult to apply cautery or spasm.
And the manicure of that is what you should start by cutting the vein of the inferior saphenal egress and then according to the virtue of your hand, and place that cezer between your hands and convert the ear into parts, and a small fissure in the tip of the ear you must let out the blood in the place that is most pregnant with it. And if the fissure of the lunar figure appears when it passes over the foot, and the foot is wasted, remove that part as much as you can using appropriate instruments; and at that time, take care of that with speed, and cure that which is in that place.
And if the cause of the ear is one of the greasy ones that you have seen and are inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your advice, then you should take your subtle substance according to this form: When administering care to that person's abscess, apply the remedy to that wound which is located in the ear.
If you do not apply it when you think that the patient has already been hydrated by the steam of the ear, and pause there for a while, and then extract from those with care, or with your fingers, or with a needle in the place where they were, then the extraction of the fluid will be easier.
In the water that is inserted into the ear, which the patient uses for nasal congestion, and fills the ear canal with a piece of cloth, and places it over the ear where the water is, and if for any reason it is forgotten, then so be it; and if not, you must take several peyrings and leons according to the length of the case, and heat them in the fire for a moment, and the patient inserts one of those into the opening of the ear and places it on the other side of that part and presses it with another peyring over the peyring that is inside the ear. Thus, do not cease to apply this remedy as soon as the entire body is flooded with urine.
Thus, do not cease to apply this remedy as soon as the entire body is flooded with urine. And if the urine has flooded the entire body as soon as you take paper or gauze and, place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to touch the forehead when it is burning from the urine.
And if you apply and another piece of gauze and keep doing this as many times as the urine has flooded the entire body, and stretch that to the canal where it is said that the extra stone comes from.
In the extraction of the beast that has entered into that ear, if it is small, it is easy and looks like a little animal, treat that as they have said in the division; but if it is of great size, the cause appears at the end of the event, maintain the extraction of the amniotic fluid and onchises, and the cause of it is pushed aside from all other causes that are found in the ear.
In the extraction of the worm generated in the ear, when you treat that amniotic fluid as they have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not confirm your curacy, then you should cover the ear with the sun.
If here any cause of the gallstones is found, take out that one with a gentle grasp or with one's fingers, but if no such cause is found, then take a needle and thread it through the hole, and this is the form of it: Enter the extremity gently into the anus according to the amount of pain it suffers from the gallbladder; and then apply force with your hand, and make a few turns, entering if all the gallstones are small.
If you do not follow my instructions, then take out the needle and close it in the circuit of the canula as has been said; administer distillations of those that have already spread the ants in the treatment of gallstones, and you will find it in the section of distillations.
And is your discharge that which you pour the medicines into the anus with this instrument, of which this is the form of it: Make that of silver or of gold, straight, in which there will be a small hole, and insert it.
When you are in the cavity of the uterus, as is necessary here, then do so. If you want, take the needle and wrap it at the end of the uterus gently, and insert it into the concave part of the ear, or any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the canula — and that is in the ear —, and insert the needle through the tip of the ear and compress the tube with your hand until the oil is expelled from the concave part of the ear and the uterus feels the oil on it.
And if you wrap it in the ear, it is already scalded by a little fire. And keep in mind that the cause that you will distill in the ear is not too cheap, for the ears' medicines do not suffer from this.
Chapter 7.
Of the cure of ophthalmia of the ears.
Some children have had ophthalmia in the bellies of their mothers who were not perforated, and this has already happened in some men's eyes, ophthalmia in the meat of the ear due to plague or nothing in it; and this ophthalmia is seen in the preservation of the ear's wound that does not see the evening, and some are seen in the deformed parts.
When an injury occurs in the body part that does not understand the will, it is in the most difficult treatment conditions.
When you have achieved the desired effect, make sure that your hand is placed on the patient's ankle and look in that direction. If you notice swelling, open this soft sponge that is the form of this:
If the end of it where there is little latitude, the form of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the sponge is of two leathers per so that it does not hurt the ankle.
And if swelling appears in the flesh or in the meat of the foot, use those soft sponges and press firmly until it is completely inside.
And if swelling is in the front of the ankle, use a soft leather and heat that sponge slightly, and then put it in the meat of the ankle.
And if you feel swelling in it that the foot becomes difficult to move, due to fatigue, try to increase the pressure on it and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ankle.
1. And then pause in the second layer of the second cloth of the following quantity of thread that you have wrapped around the Egyptian oil; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or if you take any and dip it in water and powder it over the affected area according to your preference and use it; and if at some point the aurelha has already been stretched, then make sure that the cloth you took is not damaged and swap it with another one of the same type that you wrap around the cerot that is meant to be red, if it is the case of the stretch; and then care for this inside to make it healthy.
If you have diarrhea of the stomach, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the abdomen, and use another cure that restricts the flow of the stomach, which is called in the distillation book.
Chapter 8.
Of the cure of puffiness that happens to the eyelids.
Puffiness happens to the eyelids that is caused by some humors, and some are dry.
Therefore, if you have those sharp points or spikes, and cut them off at the ends of those tendons, and place them on the wound according to its size.
If the pain is in the flow of venous blood, then you should cauterize those points with a fine cautery under the skin.
And the best cauterization is when the cuts and wounds return to their original shape when they are returned to the same cause of the tendons; and when the points are burned, those tendons become charred and do not return.
Chapter 6.
Treatment for giant cell that goes to the eyes of the horses.
Wounds that appear in the eyes of the horses are caused by an unknown reason that is related to the giant's strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called.
And there is an addition of thick moisture in the eyes on both sides.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider that the giant is proceeding from the water that appears in the eye and is bad for all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Therefore, if there is any swelling in that area due to cold, and it is easily accessible within the foot, then suspend it from one part and cut it off at another.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and care for it after it has healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer from that, because the anguished part of the restored and reformed skin will heal.
And if the swelling is descending towards the parts of the eyelid, you must smooth the surface of the eyelid, then suspend the swelling at one part, another as you instruct for the incision, and press it to the whole part, and if the eyelid is elongated due to the incision, then you will not notice it in this case.
And at the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the location of that part which is healing after it has been healed.
Capitol.x. - This phrase does not appear to be
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel." translates to "The cure for the black spot in the eyelid of the hazel
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels." translates to "Gray spots are the result of what is generated in the layers of the eyelid, especially in children, they worsen the color of those and cause discomfort in their eyes; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of that.
When you see those eyes often on the same parts, and when they sleep; and so on their eyelids, which have already covered inflammation and imminence of an apparent ulcer in the wound; and if you find that you are entering them with your finger, then count how many you enter.
A certain maneuver is in that which the thigh pauses the head from the side it wants to be on, and a pause of the leg and the foot causes cramp, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains the articular heads of all parts, and place it over it and press on the eyelids with all the force you can so that there is an additional ulceration in the margin of the circle, and then in the margin of the humidity that hits the incidence in the fissure of the fissure that is made in flaubotomy, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in flaubotomy.
More in the preliminary operation that you pass the gut entirely within which you encounter inflammation, and in the less processed cases of inflammation it is processed through ulceration according to the form of white grayish.
Therefore, extract that which is inside the clothes that you have torn between the two thighs and roll it up from the right to the left side, after which it should be separated.
And keep in mind that you should not adjust yourself in the fissure for if the excrement does not reach the hole and the surrounding parts will be dirty.
However, if you do not see your anus at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust yourself in the fissure with a small ease as you process; and extract that which has been said; and submerge the clothes in water and wash them and place them over the area and stretch out those am polvils.
And so those who take salt and place that in the cavity of the fissure because there is some moisture left.
And after that, treat that when it is healed.
However, if you have an accident in the location of the plaster, then treat that by applying emplastres cedatils when it is healed.
Capitol. This is a Roman numeral, which corresponds to
The first line of the text is "De manieyras de tactimi del huel." This phrase can be translated as
When the eyelids of the hulls are naturally raised and aged, and if there are any signs of illness, it is necessary to treat them with manicures of the hulls. There are four ways to do this: either with cauterization, or with medical acupuncture as it is said in the capital of cauterization; or with atactic incisions and sutures; or with cannulas as you direct.
The first source sentence to translate is: "E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.
When the corner of the eyelid is injured and the sharp end of the lacrimal bone pierces the lacrimal pit; and then extract the fiel and place your finger on the corner of the eyelid, and cover it with a thin piece of cloth or drap, and press it against the eyelid, and it will look like a small blade of grass.
However, I believe that the figure is different according to the amount of eyelid elevation, for it is already diversified among men, and some of those require that a certain quantity be cut into the eyelid according to the degree to which the eyelid is softened.
And if you have placed the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin at the lacrimal major with the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure is close to the natural pits of the eyes, it looks like the largest of the king's royal palaces.
And place the onion at one of the two angles of the noose, and cut it all, and adjust it to the mouth of the gullet or the fine lynch, and remove the sinew, and make it adhere if there are superfluous strings over two cords for some reasons, if you want to do that, and if not, do not worry.
And properly close the incision of the testicles within three or four days, and properly care for it.
And if you wish, close the suture properly, and keep it moist with what dries and constricts the eyelid, as soon as the eyelid is red, use the seal of the plague and its addition; better to make fewer sutures and thus save time.
However, there is concern about the thigh, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another mantra for dressing, and you see about the eyelid as if it were a piece of mortar, and then raise the eyelid three times in this manner:
And if it is not possible to do this, take the uncini, and do not tear them, then take a nail in the one that has the thread and put it in the mast of the figure, and enter the other testicle through the larger lacrimal, and the other through the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the two sides of the testicles as equal as possible, and raise the rest of the chain over the one that is placed as if it were a piece of mortar.
And accordingly adjust the edges of the plague's mouth with a suture, and care for that which is inside that it may be healthy.
If you happen to have an abscess, either your stitch or your wound, clean the abscess with soap and water, and rinse it.
And some crusts appear on the eyelid that its parts have been converted, then know that you use in that place what they have said about the suture; less suture is needed where it is not artificial.
To clean the canals is done in this way: And is that you convert the eyelid and cut the figure that follows according to what I have found; and accordingly for art make canals or subtle stitches of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width is according to the width of the spatum. And if you have already sutured at the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
And add to each of the subtleities that are superfluous on the eyelid of the hazel, and tighten the canals of some parts with a strong pressure, and lay it aside for later use, where the coda for the pressure is destroyed and becomes disqualified and turns inside when it is inserted into the cavity.
If it is late, then cut the cloth as soon as possible, and properly care for the wound that has been infected.
Once closed, the eyelid is raised and the eyebrows do not pull.
And this is the way to cut warts that you will follow in this way: and the length and width are neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
When the eyebrow is hard, the wart can be cut off with a sharp knife.
When the eyebrows are not natural, hard and sharp and prickly, the operation is done by you who takes a sharp knife and places it on that soft and slight part of the neck that is slightly sloping and slightly leonine, and makes sure that you adjust the ends of the warts and the noses without being too subtle. And the length of the soft parts is about a palm.
And you may put another small soft part further on, and clean the ends of that if you wish.
When the patient is lying down, place the uterus in the upper part of the abdomen, and it will be easier for you to perform your work, as this operation is delicate and small.
And introduce the needle into the eye of the pelvis that requires an anchor, and make it penetrate deeply into the eyelid as soon as it exits the natural pelvis.
And pull the pelvis inside the eyelid and insert the other into the joint, and there should be one or two, not more.
And pull your hand out that the pelvis is outside the eyelid and inserted into the joint, and it should be in the natural pelvis.
If you are not pulling the joint and the pelvis is not outside, pull the joint to the parts that follow after the wound you have made, as soon as it is outside the joint of the part that you have cut.
And see that which you have made with the eye of the wound, and if you pull the joint and the part, and cut it and close the wound, and leave it for two or three days, until the pelvis adheres to the place and covers over that good flesh.
If the penis is short, you should adjust it to a long natural penis and raise it, or it will enter that space improperly, and you should then lift it.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
The treasury of your cure is that you pierce as many bones as are not solid according to the form that follows the beginning.
This operation which they have said is none other than a correction of healing that does not return the form of the place according to what was at the beginning.
Chapter 34.
Of the cure of eczema which is made in the eyelid.
This eczema which is made in the eyelid, which is truly called eczema; and it is of two kinds, one natural and the other accidental.
The more accidental one is made by plague or by a cut or by cauterization or by other such means.
And the way of the operation of the eczema is that you take a loop and make it double, and fix it on the flesh, and let it pass from the inner corner of the eye to the outer corner of the eye, passing through those two ends of the flesh.
And extend the flesh to the parts where the loop is and cut it at that place, and incise into the moistened fat. If the figure of the eyelid returns to its original position, and if not, take the mirror and hold it in front of that part, and with that convert the eyelid, and you will see the fissures in the eyelid's edge.
If the extremities of the fissures of two angles of the incision are turned inward, and if one of them is turned inward when they come together, and the figure of the other angle is turned inward when they gather together.
This figure is Greek: the letter Lambda.
And if you take the flesh of that part according to the amount that is left of the nail, then it will be the eyelid.
And if you adjust the separated parts and sew them together with that thread; and if you cure those that have been told of the softening medicines and the blisters that are inside when they are healthy.
And if you operate through a fissure or suture or cauterization, you must know that you are making a flat cut on the eyelid's edge according to what is preceded. And separate the calf from the two lips as they have said.
In the sum of the sermon of the cure of alxmaxatans when they are cut or removed, which runs in this operation, subsequent to being prepared by the form of alxmaxatans, and it is in the shape of various waves.
And the artificer saves all times prepares engen in each hand that is possible for it to return the figure to its natural or previous form, or rather of that, and this one then according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the larger dispositions.
Capitulum .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in some men who have the eyelid firmly attached to the album of the cheek, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is recommended that you enter the extraction of the ray from the eyelid, and raise it therein, or extend it to the other side.
And if you insert the adhesion to a subtle sputum, which is not of sharpness of the incisions, having obtuse a little so that this malleus is not worried about the operation, and remain the sputum that does not affect the hazelnut in its sharpness.
When you have removed the excess moisture from the area, return the eyelid back to its natural form and ensure that the adhesion is completely cured.
Then, add saltwater to the wound; or, distill water in the sun and dissolve it in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the wound, and place your hand over the wound, infusing albumin into it, and use the third day for consolidating causes within which it is cured.
Chapter XVI.
Of the incision of the eyebrow and the removal of the skin of the eyelids.
You should know that the eyebrow is made of two layers, one nervous and one non-nervous, resembling a firm, subtle substance; or it is non-nervous, resembling white, wet humor, which when touched, or attempted to be taken with the finger, is cut off and the finger does not stick in it.
And if you eat the specials only from the larger tear duct, it will gradually cover the eye and prohibit light and movement of the wound.
When the worker's hand is in the scar of the patient's thigh, and the thigh pauses the need to be covered in the upper part, and works the hairs of the thigh, and raises the eyelid to your eye, and approximately collides the ungla am onci of a few duplication and extends it to those parts. And take an agula and enter it into that un pel of a horse or buou or vaqua, or semblance, or feather, or double the extremity of the agula little by little and place it in the middle of the ungla, and penetrate it into the agula, and hold the ungla with your finger; and extend it to those parts, and cleanse it at the lap of the pel the latz of the ungla which touches the pupilla. And do you follow that with the agula into the lower part of the pel.
And you insert the romanent into the edge of the lacrimal am spatum subtle or petitas forfexs, and cut the flesh of the lacrimal natural because if it is inserted in that way, continuous fluxes of watery sacs will occur.
When someone asks if you can see the skin on the extended or contracted part of the body, and they say that this is the form of the leopard, then it is said that this is the form of the leopard.
E se tu touches la tunica cornea o la pupilla, entens que estàs violentando el sistema visual del paciente, i estais causando daño a su visión.
If the incision is not properly dressed with a few drops of sal or a piece of cloth soaked in cold water, and it is allowed to enter another day, then it should be treated promptly to prevent further damage.
If the wound is not nerve-ending and you cannot insert the needle or it is not located in that area, then this type of wound is treated by a physician and is cured according to the prescription provided in the division.
If you want to make an incision in that area, then you should open the thigh and take out a piece of skin with sharp edges according to this form. I have subtlety. If that is rarefied and concealed and goes into that place, then you distill from your mouth into the hole of the point of sinew or of the skin or of the wound, and fill the hole on the other day.
And if you do it over that operation when it is almost all done, except that the cauterization does not stay in the hole, then you should remove that, and cure at the beginning the cauterization, entering that it is healed.
And if you repeat your operation over that injured part when it is almost healed,
If the eminence of the tear duct is found in the hole for great pain, then suspend it on one; and insert another part into that one, and do not end the insertion before you do not insert it so that no fluids of ulcers come out.
And if you distill from the tear duct's skin and sinew when it is healed,
Chapter XVII.
Of inserting of glass and water that comes from the skin adjusted in the hole.
When some red spots appear on the skin of the face, and they are quickly covered by the eyelid, or if they touch the eyelids and do not cover them well, and the eyelids hang down over the cheekbones, it is a sign of gout.
The operation on the foot is that it causes pain in the top of the foot; and you should open all the holes in that area with suitable forceps or pliers, and then insert the skin at the beginning of the wound, and close it after everything is finished in the groove, and hold it back from the pressure you must apply to your operation.
And is your incision the one that is made by those who have recommended it in the inscription of the unguent, or if it is made with small forceps that are tied together according to the form of this capital?
When the wound is closed and the whole of the skin is covered with salt, you should fill the hole with water or distill it on the red powder that resembles the powder of corrosive medicines, and place your hand over the wound in front of the cheekbone until it is sure that there will be no swelling from the cut.
If Roman happens to have gout and is in good health, and fears the cauterization of gout, then let him examine the ulcer and treat it with this ointment that yields to the ulcer, and repeatedly apply it over the area until it heals, and it seems to have an effect on the flesh that occurs in the wound of this species.
However, I assume that you cover the entire cure of the wound by natural or accidental means, and do not make your mark on any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Capitulum .xviii.
Of the collection of wool in the wound.
Wool that comes from the hard ones which are on the wound and forbids the measurement of its operation, and opens the wound by days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which the wool is hard is strong and if there is no other malady than wool, then you collect that wool.
It is that you command the patient to hold their breath while you perform the operation, and suspend those veins as close as possible to the tip of your thumb or index finger according to your caution; and this double extension should be done in this way:
According to the given context, "o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma" translates to "and then, the two ends should be
And then, secure those veins as closely as possible with the subtlest force, with subtlety, and avoid damaging them too much, as long as you see that they are well-attached to the tissue and are moistened.
And make sure you do not cut the tissue with the spatula; and if your operation is done quickly, and you are careful not to injure those veins.
And when you are finished, distill in the clear part of the highest point or roast to make sure that the acidity does not become too sharp that is good for the belly.
If it is not possible to close all at that time, and you apply everything to that which relieves the pain of the patient and rest it for several days until the pain of the patient is subsided and is sure of the cath.
And then you should repeat this process on the other hand that is healthy.
This is the form of the forceps:
I apologize, but the text you provided is not in a language similar
De reduccio de arizati al nas" translates to "Of reduction of the nose." However,
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os." translates to:
When you discover the bone and sometimes in its corruption or blackness, then you must use this instrument of which this is the form:
It is said that the hard head is made of iron, and it should be shaped like the point of a sword or the tip of a needle (like the following form).
Then place that there on the corrupt part of the bone, and rotate it between your fingers, and press your thumb lightly inside as you know that this cure is rasped.
If it has some scratches, and then restore the place caused by desiccating and shrinking agents.
Then if the place is consolidated and good flesh grows in it, and the body of the disease and the wound heals in 40 days, and it does not relapse or become infected, then you know that it is cured.
However, do not be in this error but reduce the fissure to the form of a nose, and follow this method: and if you discover second time with iron or sharp medicine, then you should take a tribe in this form:
When the patient's external incision is triangular in shape and the second one is made to enter as many times as possible at the end of the limb, it is called a "fistulotomy.
Then place the cautery over the bone, and that of the lacrimal; and along the rest of the hand, and around the tube that penetrates all the bones, and it feels the pain as if it were being torn apart by wind and fire when you touch it.
Then restore the place with the medicinal plasters that dry out the skin as much as possible.
Then, as the flesh and skin endure, return the material that has seeped into the edges to their original position, so that it is easier to touch the leg.
Chapter 20.
On reducing the prominence of the hand.
When the hand is prominent in its entirety and does not cause any harm or decrease, you should loosen the dressing, and follow it with ventilation in the neck where the scarification was made and allow it to heal well; and place a liniment on the hand that is made of acatra, aloe, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the remedy over the hand with powders.
When the woman's hands are held by the leopard's paws, and each paw is doubled into four parts; and they are made to bite.
Then pause one paw on top of the other according to the quantity of what is needed. Then tighten those paws with a strong grip; and repeat the winding of the wounds; and take away the wind and sharpen the hurt day by day and night.
If you want to soften the ligament, make sure it is straight.
And take away the ligament as day by day and night as we have said.
If the wound has already been reduced, then so be it, and if not, repeat the plastering on the paws and the stricture and the winding until it is healed.
Capitulum .xxi.
Of the inscription of the prominence of the uvea tunic.
When there is a rupture in the uvea tunic, and it becomes prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids as a grain of sand, and its shape is distorted for this reason, and you want to inscribe it as they have recommended, that you enter the agulum into the socket of the uvea from the side where you come out, and place another one on the part where the lacrimal double is, and make it penetrate and leave the first agulum according to its disposition; and inscribe the location of the double agulum and raise that part of the uvea in the circuit of the agulum, and tighten that point.
When you take out the gallbladder and place it on the injection of ointment made from aloe, enter when the thread falls out of the vagina.
And cure the wound with this that it comforts you when the plague is healed.
Some wounds are made of the whole part that is in a circle around the horn, and it is perforated by the subtle spatulum that comes to the fundament of the horn, and water runs into the bladder, and the horn descends and enters as much as possible.
And stretch it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of galls.
This malady, which is called gall, is not the same as that which is adjusted in the horn like water descending and not this one.
The most difficult part of working on this is that you must close the wound over the exposed flesh and stitch, and then take the cap and put it on your hands as many times as you can, and when you see the sore coming to the parts behind, and it is dry and does not descend, and the lum remains, and the gall sees the causes as they were.
If it does not go down below, you know it is wet.
If the preparation for the descent to the anus is not made, as they have said, then place the buttocks together and press subtly with your thumb on the cornea of the eye and above the conjunctiva of the eyelid, entering if necessary up to the cornea (into the location where it was), entering if necessary to remove the feces.
Therefore, if you forget to remove it, you should dilute the water in the container where you mixed milk and water that you already had and fenugreek.
And if the cure is for other causes, then enter if necessary to heal it.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of the water that comes from the container.
As they have said, the species of water are divided and which one corresponds to the declaration of health, then follow that second with the health.
You must make sure that the anus is between your buttocks on a cushion and the water in the container is warm, the stringent one.
And apropos pause a little from the eyelid of the eye that is the left, if the one that is the left is the one that is the wet, then pause a little from the left; or if it is the right, then pause a little from the right.
And if it is your left hand that holds the right, if the one that is the right is the one that is the wet; or if it is the left, then hold the left with your left.
And pause the extremity of the thumb at the top of the crown by the largest part of the ray in the album of the eye that is part of the lacrimal bone, and press the thumb with your thumb and roll it with your thumb and roll it with your thumb.
And enter into the album of the eye and feel that the thumb has already penetrated because of the wetness.
And know that the measurement of the thumb is on the measure of the space that is the pupil within the end of the black, and it is the crown of the eye; then you will see that the pupil is in the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause for a while in the place where the poison is, and then you should cut down another vein on another part, and if the poison comes out much, then lay the abdomen over the place where it can see its sight so much, and pause for a moment in the shade.
And then replace it with another small one; therefore, if the poison comes out, you should immediately stop that other vein that is not yet cut.
And then when it is healed and does not come out, you should immediately extract it with ease, and raise it little by little, and dissolve in clear salt from gemma a small amount of water, and wash the wound with that; and pause for a moment outside the hollow or stop or infused ointment on rose oil and albuminous juice and liguida am aquo the hollow so.
We have those who are from our time that pause over that which has been eaten of our juice and albuminous juice.
And if you do not obey my advice to insert the wound in the flesh for its hardness — which is one of the reasons why men have hard flesh — then I advise you to take the salve that is called "alberid" of which this is the form:
When you perforate that joint, and do not finally remove it from the wound, and do not if you do not make it in a hidden place.
Then enter the second one as they have said.
E you must make the compliment of your work, be prepared for the patient to fall asleep in a position that lies on his back with his head covered with a cloth, and be prohibited from all movements.
Then pause the nature of the gout because it is lined with its nature, and do not make the eye cap go to the part that is on the right or left side of everything.
And let the limb be according to its position on the third day.
And remove that from that in that dark place and expel the visible fire, and see some causes, and return the limb on the seventh day.
And do not make gout in the hour of the curers or too much in the infusion. They have said that you should take gout by so much water that it falls with great and violent regard.
If you encounter a cauterization wound, make sure that the dressing falls off on the seventh day, and correct the one that causes the burn.
Look at the face of the patient and place your hand on his mouth to regulate his breathing for a few days, as it exists in the most gloomy state.
And gradually increase your voice and speak about its causes.
You know that in alchemy, no vision of any kind is excused for the disciple, and you should be careful about the operation.
It has already been revealed to us of those who were the disciples of the Art, and the Art said that he made fire in the Ayrac maiden by perforating the one that succeeds the water.
However, you have not seen anything like this in our land, nor has anyone read about it in the free books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of maidens over which those who ignore them act:
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This subtlety is triangular in shape, with an acute extremity as described above.
Capitol Chapter XXIV.
Of the care of the flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are various hardened flesh from which one is assembled some cause that is gathered under Scorpio of motz pes, or polyp peys; and this malady is called polypus, as it resembles that represented by those peys. And of the nose there is flesh cancerous, black, and lapadia; and of the nose that the flesh of the lion is not of a dark color.
Therefore in that which is in these flesh of the lion not fraudulent nor cancerous, make sure to close the cavity between your hands and place it on the sun, and heat the nails in those flesh, and pick up the tip in those flesh. And if you extract that from the parts of the flesh, and if you inscribe there that which you have understood from those spumed gout subtle from one part into which you know that all the flesh has been left; that if Roman of that cause of the which the abscess is possible, then you do this am with one of the subtle instruments am for ease within which of the Roman it makes a cause. If the lord or lady has an injury or accident to the thumb, then stop that which is causing the pain; if it is one of the malignant boils, then cut and cauterize that which is inside, removing the entire sac.
And if your patient's nose is in the same position as the insertion point, then you should agree and agree with it or not. If the nose is opened and humidity is introduced into the palate, then you should know that it has already been healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate through that which is causing the pain, then you should know that there is nothing in the pus-filled bones of the nose that has been removed.
Therefore, you should insert the cure as far as it reaches the area that is causing any swelling, and cleanse it with water, and pause between each part of the quantity of the said or message, and engage the thigh and enter one end of the fist into the nose am the ray or am another cause that may be possible.
And if this is done, that the odorant may enter when it comes to the nostrils and be placed on the golden snout, which is seen by many children at school, and it is a cause that makes him do this.
And then pause the two extramittats of the eye, one end that goes over the nose and the other that rubs on the nose, and then apply firm pressure on the flesh of the eyes that are in the socket, and if you know that the flesh is already in the eye sockets.
And then extract the eye, and place it in the nose with the abstract of the sand one calgua, and keep it for three days or more until the entire eye is completely covered with the sand.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a plug of clay for some days until it is healed.
If you need more treatment for cure that exists, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge fazedor who has distillates oil and medicines in the nose:
And make of silver or gold, which is similar to a small lantern that is coming out, as small as it can, and the meat is similar.
And if you want, make a plug closed as a cane, and the plug of the instrument a capipurge fazedor is flat, discovered; and it is the handle in the end of it, where you hold it when you scrape with oil or water that you want from the sucs and from the causes suctiblas.
The text you've provided is a Latin medical treatise from the Middle A
The following line seems to be incomplete or missing some context. However, based on the previous lines, it might refer to the nostrils or noses
This line seems to be discussing the appearance of the nostrils or noses. It mentions that they are magnified and enhanced on certain days, possibly due to the observer's gaze or observation.
This line seems to be instructing the reader to carefully observe the appearance of the nostrils or noses and record all findings. It suggests that the observations should be made at the beginning of the examination. This line seems to be advising the reader to pause or apply a cautery or medical treatment at the location where the observation is being made. It suggests that the treatment should be applied immediately if it is available in the patient's location.
This line seems to be providing advice on how to observe and record the appearance of the nostrils or noses. It suggests that the observation should be made as soon as possible if the nostrils are magnified, and that the observer should consider whether they are lapificated (possibly referring to a medical treatment), dur (tough), of fusca color (dark color), and with pauc sentiment (few sensations). The observer should not touch the affected area with their fingers, as it may cause further harm. The text also mentions that some people may have a "granda malicia" (great malice) towards the affected area, which may affect their observations.
If the gout is from the lion's paw and not from cold color, and sometimes when it appears it can be in all of that, then you remove the skin and insert that same piece into the wound, and cure the area as much as possible that is exposed and creeping in where it is sick and come out.
Chapter 26.
Regarding the suture of the nose and lips and the hair of the forehead when the continuity is dissolved by plague or seemingly.
Know that when a solution of continuity is found in one of these cartilages, few confirmations are found in that operation but in other people's.
Therefore, when for some reason you come to any of these causes, whether it is fresh plague according to the law of nature, and then adjust the cut lips of the plague according to the suture, and cure that which is sick within.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is found to be healthy, then you should know that you must remove each part of its apparent flesh within which there is no sickness. When the wound is properly adjusted to the seam and tightened there, and over it, powder with dragon's blood and other similar ointments is applied, and a small piece of plaster or another of the consolidated ointments is placed on it, either two or three times, and the same ointment is removed and replaced with another that is suitable for healing those wounds, and it is cared for as needed.
Is the manicure of the suture that you add the solution of continuity or an eyelet as they have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity and make it known to you.
Capital Chapter XXVII.
Of extraction of those causes that come in the lips of the wounds.
Motes visible in the wounds of women in the parts of the lips of their labias, which are hard and resemble grapes, and some are soft and others are larger.
Therefore, if you cover the lips and nails of each of those hard parts, and then completely fill the location with something that is strong enough to hold it in place, and then wet it with something that can be easily washed and cleansed, and then treat the location with something that is antiseptic, then it will be healed.
Chapter 28.
Of the scar from the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Grand remedy of veins over the adjusted flesh in the gums that the ancient alabar used, then if you cover that with one or what you have with your hand and hold that with your hand and lay down the scar on its side and let the saint run or the sanc.
And then pause over the located sageness or another sterilizing powder or excitating powders.
And if that flesh returns, then you inscribe that secondarily and cauterize it, and make sure that the cauterization does not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for teeth made of iron.
When on the surface of the teeth of the joints and between the gums there are tight, rough, hard, and some yellowish ones that are painful or greenish-colored and are within the gum due to corruption and are the loose teeth.
And then cover the thigh with your hands and place the head of the intestine on the top, and remove the teeth in which those rough and hard ones appear, and they seem to be made of sand within which no cause is found, and it is of blackness and citrinity and of others within which they are deformed.
And if you are still here, so be it; and otherwise, you must repeat the ratio over those on another day and another and a third until it comes to the end of the statement that you want.
And you know that the teeth have needed various types of cuts and figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And for so that the razors are suitable for the tooth, they cut from the part of the joint and not from the other razors, and these forms of razors are those that you must prepare in advance that you have enough:
The first line of the text is "Capitol .xxx.",
The second line translates to "Removal of teeth.
The third line translates to "Make sure you cure the tooth of all its pain completely and gradually in the total removal of the tooth, as there is no cause that satisfies the veins when it is removed, as there is a substance that enters when it is excised during the removal of the tooth.
The fourth line translates to "When the thigh is about to have the tooth removed, you must be certain that it is the painful tooth that is affected by the veins, and that the healthy tooth is not affected, and you remove it and stop the pain once the painless tooth has been removed, as we have seen in hair removal operations.
The fifth line translates to "Therefore, how do you certify that it is the painful tooth and that you know what, when you scrape in the circuit of the tooth, if there is any virtue in the part where the gum of the tooth is dissolved, and take those that are closest to the root, or forfeits subtle ones at the beginning, little by little, until it comes together.
And if you want to cut it with great care or force, and stop the foot between the thighs that hold the one you take, and then pull the tooth secondly in a straight line in a manner that does not touch the one you took, nor the larger pain of the patient.
And if you do not forget, take one of those instruments, and place it at the end of that part with ease and effort to remove the one that was made at the beginning.
If the tooth is cut or burned, you should carefully cover that part and gently pull it with your hand at the end of the subtle part so that it is not distorted in the moment of your constraint over that.
And work with great care in the circuit of the entire gum part and keep your strength that does not touch it and removes part of it, and return to the buttocks for the worst pain of the tooth.
And be careful that you do not make it as the barbers who perform their operations and courageously remove them, those who do not administer what they were recommended; four visible methods bring large women with difficulties that are trapped, and the benefit of all of them or some of those, or that extracts that tooth from the mandible like the visible methods have testified.
When the eradication of the wound is washed with water or vinegar, it is customary to apply a salve.
If the flux is accompanied by fever, it is customary to apply a poultice. Take a certain quantity of oak bark and apply it over the affected area, and if it does not cure the flux, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and their thinness are useful for those who have long extractions, with a short handle and a thick head, so that they do not bend when used to operate.
And it is customary to use them as many times as necessary with a long handle, when the extractions are not bent, they are short extractions.
And there are pains of Indian steel in the extractions of teeth, and in the extractions of those there are roots of the kind that some of them are inserted into others and are stretched by a strong descent force, and some of the extractions of those are the form of the beak of an owl which has the name of cony, it is difficult, and they are of great constraint.
I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a
The translation of "De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de les mandibulas trincadas" is not clear without additional context. However, based on the words used, it could be translated as "Regarding the removal of tee
The translation of "Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:" is not clear without additional context. However, based on the words used, it could be translated as:
The first line of the text translates to: "The symptoms of their pain are like a limit or a wall.
If you do not obey my instructions and use these forceps or tweezers, you will find that I am holding onto the razor and dissecting all the flesh and inserting the instrument that is called this one, which is a small lever of this kind:
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma
If for that reason the razor is forgotten, then so be it; and otherwise, help me to these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extraction in which there is at least one large one.
The form of the second instrument is that it is a triangle and has a fine subtle end.
And now I have helped you with this instrument, which has two ramps, and this is the form of the following one: And I will help you with other instruments that you should use in the removal of teeth; four advantages are made with this instrument which is like one large one, and this is the form:
When the tortuous or short end of the triangle is a large one and is not rounded by itself but is three-cornered, it is called a bend.
And another thing you should know are the teeth that are most similar to the others.
The skilled artificer is more subtle in his art, but he fails because he does not know or use the proper instrument for each malady; four are of the maladies for which the ancients did not have or use different instruments according to the forms of various species.
If the bone of the jaw or the other bones of the mouth are rounded or if they are swollen, it is necessary to be careful about them in their place as much as possible that is convenient for the instruments and forceps that have been mentioned in the extraction of the teeth, and this is the form:
And if there is any small enlargement little by little, and it is held or kept in the mouth so that it does not escape or flow through the hole of the bone of all, and the place is restored with suitable medicines for this.
When there is a small hole in the bone, you should identify that hole and its surrounding tissue, and treat it within the body to heal it.
Chapter 32.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth in relation to others.
When prominent teeth do not follow the natural course of the body's shape, and especially when they are more pronounced in women and particularly in religious women; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not related to another tooth, and there is no possibility of surgery or liniment for that tooth, you should treat that one. However, if it is not anchored to another tooth, you should insert this instrument into that one, as it appears to be like a morsel of meat and is made of Indian iron with sharp edges.
And is your insertion in the one that you insert into that for too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not a part of another tooth.
And if a prominent tooth is expansive, you should line it with iron of India that is of the form of this one.
This sentence appears to be describing the use of Indian steel needles and their application in treating joint pain caused by hardness or roughness (agulhas). The needles are inserted into the skin, and the doctor checks if the patient's teeth are loose or not. If they are not, it means that no other tooth is affected. And you have already cut that line in that place, and then sharpened those razors.
And if the tooth is broken and the tongue is affected, you should know that the root of that section should be covered with something to prevent the sharp edge from being exposed and corroded, and to prevent the tongue from descending and the word from becoming corrupted.
Chapter 33.
The restoration of tooth decay is not expensive, either of gold or silver.
When the front teeth are affected by concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the jaw cannot bear over that hand, and you have treated it with medical styptics, and your treatment has not been effective, then you should know that silver is not as expensive as gold, and argent is made to turn green and to be applied to certain days, while gold does not change over time.
And it is the finest and most delicate in the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the wedge is that you hold the finely ground powder and hold double the amount between two healthy teeth, and accordingly as the corners of the powdered powder become tortuous between the decayed teeth, or if one or more, it enters through the film to the healthy tooth of the other part. And so, you should repeatedly massage the affected area until you reach the part where it began, and apply firm pressure but with caution to avoid causing further harm.
And be careful not to apply too much force to the patient's throat, as it may cause further harm if the wound is not clear.
And then, cut the excess tissue with forceps or scissors, and place them in different locations to hold them, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth to avoid causing harm to the tongue. And then, you should apply that pressure as you would in Rome.
If it slides or breaks, apply firm pressure to that or those with another hand in that manner for the entire time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of healthy and damaged teeth, and how many times you should apply pressure to these:
And when you return a tooth or tooth to its proper place in the appropriate locations, and they grow back as recommended, and remain strong.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout
And some bones are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they are made in the form of teeth, and placed in a location where the tooth deficiency is present, and they are strengthened as they have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
The text you provided is not in the language you described, but rather in Lat
Translation: "Of the symbol of the liquid that is in the language and forbids speech.
This ligament, which I see before me with some visible veins or is natural for the kind of man it is, or accidental and incidental due to plague that has already been consolidated.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French as well. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English:
If there is any pain or difficulty in that area, and this is for the consolidation of plague, then you should cut and divide that part within which it is adhered by the ligament and dissolve the knot.
And be careful not to find a false fissure in the skin of the flesh and that you divide here arch and let come out the pus.
And wash the wound with water, if it is dirty or hot or wet; and then place the tongue clean; this is the one that holds the thigh in any way that it is not consolidated another way.
If you find pus coming out, place your hand on the corner that was cut; if the pus comes out, then do cauterization of the spot where you can do cauterization with a pointed cautery. And that cure is for the other causes within which it is healthy.
Capitulum xxxv.
From the extraction of a gallstone, you place the tongue.
When some tongues are affected by language disorders, similar to the small name that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and it is greatly admired when it swells after biting the mouth.
This is the first line of the text, and it seems to be describing an operation or procedure that is being performed on the patient's thigh. The phrase "huebras la boca del malaute" is not clear, but it might mean "opens the mouth of the wound." The phrase "sesent devant le
This line seems to be describing the appearance of the wound or opening that has been made during the operation. The phrase "fusca color" could mean "dark color," and "negra" could mean "black." The phrase "dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment" is not clear, but it might mean "hard, with which the patient does not feel pain." The phrase "lahoras no
This line seems to be describing a condition that the wound or opening might be in, and what to do if it is. The phrase "blancor, en le qual es humiditat" is not clear, but it might mean "white color, with moisture." The phrase "lahoras tu met le onci en lu" could mean "you place the needle in it," and "inscideys aquel am spatum subtil" could mean "insert a small amount of serum under the skin." The phrase "e inscindeys le de tota partida" is not clear, but it might mean "and pierce through to the entire part." The phrase "e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio" could mean "if the wound is found during your operation," and "lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat" could mean "you stop and take out the needle." The phrase "so es vetriol
When you have finished your work and entered the patient's chamber, enter when the patient is calm and clean; and care for that person as you would for yourself in this manner when they are cured.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the extraction of an abscess from the breast and of that which is nothing in the groin and of other abscesses.
When you open in the groin, these are glands that are assembled like cloth, which become deformed and are named gouty breasts, which when you treat them as said in division and are not cured, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, of few sensations, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of the wound. Leave that alone until it matures, and either you or she will break it for itself.
And if it is of a white color and the root is rough, then do not touch that with iron because it may be infected.
The first source sentence translates to: "In the operation you are considering, if you find that the wound has healed or if it has decreased in size due to any diminution; then cleanse the wound with water, and place a piece of cloth between your teeth, and the servant will take hold of your tongue here with the instrument of noble quality which is this form:
This line translates to: "And it should be made of silver or gold, and it should be fine like thread.
Then, when you place the tongue on the wound and show it to you, and cover it with that part, hold it there and take it out as much as possible. Another thing you take out of the dressings, and cut it with that instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you take out of the dressings, and cut it with that instrument of which this is the form: and it is assembled like forceps, but the exits of it are curved, so that the orifice of any of those is in the end of the other, which is sharp, and made of iron polished.
When this instrument is not at your disposal, insert that hard part of which this is the form of it: If it is sharp for one part, it may be soft for another part.
It appears that you have inserted honey. Insert the other one following this hand-made tool for inscribing, and then the inscription will be cleansed by water.
If the flow of blood is small, clean it with water mixed with milk or honey and similar substances as for that of the causes within which the flow of blood is restricted, and treat it accordingly.
And some veins may be found in the groin or another place, and insert those following what you have written in the inscription of honey-bound veins.
And you have already treated a woman with an hematoma that was located in the groin, which hematoma tended to be of a dark color, with little sensation, which had previously closed the groin, and the woman was breathing quickly, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking and water intake, and it had been pervading to death for a day or two.
And the hematoma had already swollen so much that it had been reducing by two steps every time it was raised by two thrusts.
Thus, you must sew carefully and remain in one place, and draw out that thread, and sharpen it at the end of that great piece, and then insert the other part of the wound, and press the mouth of it with your tongue, and taste its saliva, and then leave the thighs in that position.
And if you cut a large piece of it, and did not run out of its blood even a little bit. Thus, absolutely is the guillotine of that woman, and began to drink so much blood, and then you did not stop inserting into that suture for a long time, and that suture was located in the place where that one was inserted, which prolonged that.
Thus, you must make the thighs of that man hot and cauterized the guillotine of him, and then for addition; and you walk around and do not know what God has done in that prophecy.
Chapter 37.
Of insertion of the hool when it is sutured.
When catarrh occurs in the throat, and it is long and winding, then it is called a "bubbling" or "bubbling" by doctors; and if it is in the rough and round part of the neck, and it is called a "throat".
When the disease is cured and it has been said in the division, and does not comfort your cure, and sometimes you see that the cushion has already left the body and is subtle, then you should cover what you have inserted with that which has been added round; and if it reaches that length and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and does not reach the chest, then you should cover the incision of the body, because there is fear in the thigh.
And when you see that second hand that you have told about its whiteness and length, that you make the thigh and press the tongue of the other instrument with which you process its form and place the onion in the new one, and pull it down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called in the insertion of two mells.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the
After making the incision, use the one that has been recommended for the incision of two fingers, and cure that part which is sick.
If the thigh was affected by the incision of the foot, then use an engin in the cauterization of that part, and the hand of the cauterization should not be wet, and it is that you hold the tip of the thigh in your hand, and press the tongue of the instrument that has been said with the instrument that has been said in the capital of cauterization, and comfort that live cause, and do not make it too thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
The extratation of the cavity should be made in the place where the cavity of the thigh was paused by medicine, and the instrument of medicine should be placed on the vessel, and the thigh should be wet with saliva or mouth extract of that person for the internal medicine, so that no such cause is deposited on the gallbladder of him and that he descends.
And if you have a sharp pain in the throat, and you see that it is enlarged and dry due to the bites of the physician, then this is a sign of gout.
If you wish, take the scalpel and envelope that over the extremity of the toe, and submerge the scalpel in the medicine, and enter the toe into the canula through which the scalpel adheres to that canula, and make as many cuts as you can within a few days or four.
And if you are told to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and remove the cauterization from the circuit of the grape on the scalpel, and modify it in that aqueous solution that is in the circuit of the medicine, and rinse it with clean water, and treat it deformed by the embrocation, and discard the guarguarismes when it is healthy.
And this special treatment is saved if you inscribe and keep it for a long time with fear.
When some wounds are treated with the humor of gout that has been placed subtly under cauterization and incision, four things are treated under this manicure: garlic, soap, oil, razor, Arabic cushions, broom, and similar to those of herbs, and adjust all of these causes, or some of them, in one wave, and they are submerged in the water gently, and are washed; and the wave is made to be gentle with the wind, and there is a stopper on the side of the wave, over which a instrument conquau of silver or silver is placed according to this manicure; it is made of silver or silver.
If there is an opening in the end of the thigh, if steam reaches the uvula over the one, if the uvula is not obstructed.
And iterate over those dry wounds if they are not moist, and make sure you do not perform this cure at the end of the event of betting, for too many adjustments in the bet, and it is not that you do this, but you must declare the bet of the cauterization of Lu Caut.
If you do not have this instrument at your present, take a cane and make a closure of the hood on the mouth of the patient, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, and the closure of the hood prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this remedy is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of extracting thorns and of gout that adheres to the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys to the groin or thorn or any other cause.
Then it is necessary that you extract the gout that appears, over which the eye can see, and if you please, use your tongue on the instrument, so that it is declared to you that it is in the groin.
And if gout is not seen and is hidden in the groin, then it is necessary that you make the patient vomit from the groin, so that the food is thrown up in the stomach, and if the cause attached to the groin is forgotten by vomit, or that the patient vomits a pessary of nutmeg or a spoonful of razor grass or a bouquet of seaweed; or take a sponge marine soaked in lemon juice and apply it to that, so that it reaches the location where the thorns are extracted, then you will forget the cause. When you may take a snake and dip it in some milk, and then carefully remove it; or take a pear and carefully cut it into pieces and then eat it.
If you do not remember those causes which they have spoken of, then you should use an instrument similar to this form:
And make it as large as a small pin, and in the extraction of the tooth, make the cavity as easy as possible for you to enter.
And raise the gum over the tooth, and hold it with your thumb, and touch that part of the gum with your finger, so that it comes to this effect: either to remove the bone or the spine, or to make the gum hold onto its place.
However, that mouth of the tooth is like honey, because of its knowledge of the place where the cause is annexed and made to fall, and pull out the gum as much as possible with the instrument, so that it does not forget.
Capitulum .xxxix.
Chapter on the extraction of the tooth annexed to the gum.
When the physician is treating gout pain with this remedy and it does not bring relief, consider using the cold compress on the patient's thigh, as you have recommended to me.
If you see the gout, carefully extract that piece of flesh or make a small incision.
And if it is not possible for you to remove the gout, use a hollow needle and enter it into the affected area of the thigh, then place a heated iron in the hollow of the needle as many times as necessary (once the gout has died and is located in the thigh), and abstain from giving the patient too much water.
And then take a full mouthful of water, open the patient's mouth, and clean their mouth with that; and do not let any other cause affect them and drink a glass of water every hour for about an hour after the gout has been treated with the remedy.
If you do not forget that the physician recommended it, use a cimiter or asafetida to sub-smoke the thigh with the instrument that the physician recommended in the smoking of the uvula.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it
Another method of smoking is to use a bowl filled with charcoal and ash, and cover the bowl with a cover made of leather or cloth; then place the end of the instrument in the cover; remove the mouth from the end of the canula and close the mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the sinuses, because the sinuses are so narrow.
If it does not work, repeat the smoking process as often as necessary, and abstain from eating salted foods and alcohol, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that this diet be forgotten.
This is the form of the instrument that is used to treat the sinus cavity when it is seen; and it resembles forceps, but there is no curvature in it. And the table is placed in front of the patient, and its extremity resembles the beak of a cuckoo, which is plumed, in which they apply limewater, so that when they come across any cause, it does not bother him.
Capitol xli.
In this is the sum of the discourse in apercy and sectio of their apostelas.
The apostelas are special motions, of hand-like motions, according to what is remembered of them, of each in this free book.
And they are diverse in forcation and section by hand-like motions of the hands, of which one is for the specialty of apostelas in themselves; and therefore because they understand from the humors.
And the second hand-like motion is prop for the places where the accidents of the body happen, that the apostela accident in the head is another from the apostela accident in the buttock; and the apostela accident in the fleshly part happens another from the apostela accident in the joint; and each of them is judged by operation.
When it comes to stitches, some are made without perforating, but rather in maturity of the sinus in those or parts of them.
When it comes to stitches, some are made without perforating, but rather in maturity of the sinus in those or parts of them. If they are parts of a limb, and the cause is the compression of the tendons or nerves of that joint, then a post-perforation treatment is needed for that limb. If it is a primary member, and you delay the perforation of the member until its matured tissue is adjacent to the main member, or if it is the anus, then you should not perforate it without proper digestion, but only that which is part of the anus, so as not to cause pain and elongate the anus, and make a fistula, or that which is made at the end of the member that is not yet healed. You should know when to make the hole for the stitch, and then it will be mature.
You know that the maturity of the subsidence of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in the urgency and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the apothecary, and the other symptoms.
And what you know is that the puncture should be made in the spot where the apothecary's head comes out and where the purulent matter comes from, after the cure of the eminence.
And the puncture should be made by the length of the flesh or of the chest, if the apothecary's heads are in the parts of the thighs or feet, and in places where the ligaments of the nerves, arteries, are; and in all those places where there is no reflection, use the puncture according to that member.
When the apothecary is in the flesh, you should know that the puncture is made when it is confirmed that the digestion of the second part has been confirmed; that if you perforate that point, the corset of the pole and the endurance of the tongue are prolonged, and that the lips of the endured are deep.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if you make small punctures, and large ones in the large muscles and tendons, according to the size of the muscles and tendons.
And if you find other muscles and tendons where the knee is convoluted and adhered, when you make points it hurts as much as that which occurs in many double knobs and boils.
And of those that are not yet scarred, there are three angles; and of those that are scarred, the appearance is like the face of a mouse, like the muscles of the shoulders.
And of those that are scarred, if they are treated with round and lunar incision, it resembles them.
That which is not like the surface muscles of the body, if you find it, cover it with a superficial puncture or plane it as much as possible.
When the gallbladder is large and has already been operated on, and it does not close properly, causing the bile to escape; if they manage to extract a part of it, and the next day they insert the gallbladder into another part, and extract a larger portion, and perform more incisions according to the degree of pain that appears, then...
If the patient is of low birth, or of a female form, or of a small child, or of old age, then the animal spirit has resolved itself at the exit of the disease, and more firmly the malignant tumor holds onto the body, and you operate on it.
Take this warning with great caution, and if you perforate the gallbladder in which you are operating on the stones, be sure to cleanse the wounds of the gallbladder or the antique horn; and if the gallbladder is large, and the wounds of the perforation are deep, then be careful that you do not cause any damage to the surrounding organs.
If in the after-pains, a part of the umbilical cord is separated or has been made concave in the circuit, you should cover that with a piece of cloth or a piece of rag that has been soaked in cold water; and press that into the third day; and proceed with that and cure the one that covers the wound that is inside which is sick.
If at the time of your operation, you encounter bleeding, you should administer cold water and wet a cloth or rag that has been soaked in it, and place that over the location of the wound from which the blood is flowing.
If the bleeding persists, you should administer regular and careful treatment and powder those that I have recommended in the appropriate places of this free and separated body.
If it is in the winter time, and the location of the after-pains is located in the cold nerves, you should cover those with powdered dust and oil, and place them over the locations.
And if it is in the summer time, and the locations are burnt, you should cover those with wet powder or oil, and all that is inside should be moistened with water as they have said, and you should open the after-pains and clean them and administer treatment to the wound of the one that comes out which is sick.
When it comes to the cure of ulcers universally, secondly, the way of distinction has already been said for all types of ulcers, in what manner each one is the way of the cure for the specific part.
Capitol 61.
Of the sections of ulcers that come in the thigh's bend.
In the thigh's bend small ulcers, and those of the specific nodes that contain tunics which are their fact; and the specifics of their movements.
And if they are pimples, and those that contain water seeming like honey. And of those that contain water seeming like poles, and resembling them; and of those that are hard, rough.
And in the entire section, and in the extraction of those that are not feared, as the extraction of those does not cause any contraction of the artery.
And the operation in the section of those is what you express those with the instrument in the form that seems to be most appropriate, which is called an incision, and it goes in as soon as you know that it contains.
If it is necessary that there be moisture, then you should cut the surface of that part according to its length by making a superficial cut in this way:
It begins at the cut in line B and goes to the cut in line G. Therefore, when moisture is evacuated, you should remove that part that contains that moisture, and do not leave any trace of it, as many witnesses return, if there is no cause for this.
And if you submerge the cut in Egyptian mud, if there is any, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with the plague and let it enter another day, then this will corrode everything that is visible from that film.
And you repeat over that cut in Egyptian mud according to your needs and instructions, as soon as you trust that there is no cause for that film; then cure the plague by submerging it in water when it is healed.
And if the gout contains large nodes, then you should cut that according to this form: The first source sentence translates to: "When the incision has a shape of a gash, and you place your hands between the two lips of the incision and pull them apart, you exert your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
If your arch is against me, then you will find that I am the first to be informed.
And if it seems that the incision is being flattened and cut by the posture you have told me; and if the incision on the posture is pushed further, it will be a little less and drier.
And some of these postures are such that they do not cause humidity; the cause is because you inscribed on a posture on the head of a woman who was unconscious and made the posture as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be cut, and if it touches an animal, it will harm that.
In other postures, accidents do not occur in the head, but this is not the same cap, as the incisions on the heads of children and you have to pay attention to the ears, less the section of these all is superficial.
You should pause the cutting of those parts that are lower in the body, as it is more likely that the cause of the disease is in the lower parts.
And apply the remedies that are appropriate for the treatment.
Capitulum .xlii.
Of the incision of the scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Warts visible on these bandages in the neck and on the shoulders and wrists, and some have occurred in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and those warts that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is found in its own skin, and it is like that in the nodules and warts of the head, and it is like that in the nodos and warts of the chin.
And the specifics of these scrofula are warts, about some of which are some calcareous, and of those that contain moisture, and of those that are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that which you see as good position in the Tocament, of which the color of water that is manifested is similar to the color of the skin, and is not good for all parts, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not compressed, covering that which is dry superficial part of the part from the part of the end of the body of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn that entire part, and extend the lips of the skin from one, or from both if you need those, as has been said in the warts of the head, and extract a little at a time.
When caution is not exercised, the vein or nerve may be pierced.
If the abscess is not moving, that is, if it does not cause pain or disturb the patient's movement, and if it has not yet been pierced, then do not pierce it; rather, if you have already pierced the vein or artery and prohibit this from your operation, then stop and open the abscess with a knife or another instrument that does not cause pain, and clean the wound, and let the abscess enter that which has been made smooth by the incision and become softened and begin to be discharged. When the pus is expelled.
Then return to your operation after the wound has been closed.
And if you ask about the second point, whether there is any cause for the other small abscesses, then pierce them and clean them.
And if it is in the course of the great vein, be careful not to pierce that abscess along the vein. When a woman's belly is greatly stretched and she feels pain in her womb, it is customary to call this condition childbirth pains.
And then fill the wound with the cataplasm that you have already cut from Egyptian flax, and care for that.
And if you insert the entire scarlet fever, then you should adjust the corners of the wound and remove as much pus as possible without causing any additional inflammation.
If you see that there is too much inflammation due to the size of the scarlet fever, then understand how to insert the finger, and then administer sutures and close it as it is said.
If that scarlet fever contains moisture, make a superficial perforation at the location where you want to close it, and stop perforating when you see that the pus has reached the bottom of the wound, as it has been said.
And then administer sutures, use a needle and thread, and make sure it is similar to the others, as it may cause infection of the wound. When you see that the plague has already been cleansed, then you should treat that one as soon as it is healed.
Capitol 33.
The section of the Apostema's needle caused an injury to the groin.
We cut off the old section of this needle in the epilhot and did not see any man in our country who had done that before.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Few men have experienced this, as it is difficult to extract the epilhot, as if it were not good for one who has totality of all the veins and the greater parts of the thighs here.
Fewer are those who have had the plague in their mouth or groin or two anuses, when the thigh is not in the canal, as they have avoided the section of the epilhot to prevent the loss that is caused by completion.
Therefore, when you want to insert the epilhot, you should inscribe three circles of the epilhot's circles, or four small sections for the latitude where there is one circle between two circles, that the section is in cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this place is appropriate for cutting, which is private from flesh and the sinews of the sac are lumped.
If the physician is afraid, cover the parts that extend the gallbladder as much as possible, and then insert the codena into the canal as it passes, in order to avoid the vessels of the sinus if any cause exists.
And then insert the plaster as recommended; and it is significant over the incision of the canal by the flap which is of that side which is of the disruption and for the abscess of the wound.
And keep the plaster moist for some time.
Then at the hour when the perforation is made, add drops of the plaster's juice to the codena of the plaster, and that will help to strengthen the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh more nutritious within which is healthy.
According to Albucasis, the sum of the sermon that has been recommended is exposure only, which can be seen that the gallbladder has become impoverished due to those posts, and the gallbladder has come to death, and the liver is incised, and they will insert the epigastrium over the plaster so that the gallbladder can breathe over the location of the plaster for some respiration, and it will be saved from death.
When it comes to treating the wound, I command that it be cleaned from within after the poison of the malady has been consumed; and the poison of the wound lasts for three days; and therefore, I command the wound to be cleaned in this manner, and cured within those three days.
And as you have seen with my help, it is that a part of the lung is filled with a cotel and is inflamed, and you were called for the cure of the lung, and I cut open the chest as it is open in death, and discovered the plague and cleaned the affected part of the lung that was infected with the plague.
Therefore, you confessed that it had not been infected with veins or sinews, and the wind was of the plague, and I cured it within those three days that it became healthy.
And the wound did not become inflamed if it was not ruptured in the vote, and after a few days, I returned to my duties.
And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epilhot.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
The first source sentence to translate is: "De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.
This hernia of the groin is called an "aposteme" after the color of the body, and it occurs more often in women.
When the second maniacal attack comes, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no cure.
And the accidental one is followed by two maniacal attacks, the first resembling grass nodes, and the second resembling apoplexy, which is caused by narrowing of the artery, and there is fear. And it does not assume that this force is like iron in that which is small. And you help that and investigate that with the said method, and if it resembles grass nodes and is not suspended in any vein, then you insert that eye as the nodes are inserted, and extract that part from where it comes from the pelvis and bursa; and otherwise, you examine all of it to be, and apply care to the place where it covers the cure when it is healthy.
Chapter 45.
About the section of the species of nodes.
The nodes have specific motions, and I have already mentioned all the species of theirs in the division.
When you recommend that the difference between node and exitus be made according to your own judgment.
Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
When there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it is said that this cipher is at the point of the shoulder.
And then is the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cheek and is made up of flesh, whether it is greater or smaller, and there are two species, one being fat and containing humor, and the colors of the humor are motes, according to what you have said in division.
Then come the symptoms of the disease, when you reach the cure of the pain, which expounds that and inquires about it at its beginning, according to what is called intromes, which comes in the form of the caput, which is most this.
And it is the mane of inquisition of apoplexies and all nodes, and that you take this intromes and enter it into the place humidified which absorbs in the apoplexy, and you roll over the ties which you know that this small by small has penetrated the codena.
And then come the last of your but before the measure of the size of the apoplexy, and take out the intromes and consider that it is there in the form of the vestige of it.
If the dryness of the current is forgotten, regardless of what color it is, you should insert it superficially as I have said in the other postures.
If there is no moisture in the wound of the intestine, you should know that it is dry.
And make it dry over the superficial cut in this way: As I have taught you, and suspend the cut on it, and remove the skin of the entire part with ease, and keep the pelvis or sac over it and take out that sore from the node.
If it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to remove that healthy part, and you should look for it carefully and take it out as close as possible to where it does not cause any damage.
If it causes any damage, little or a lot, the node returns according to the most.
And if you notice that it causes any small part of the body to react, you should make the poultice with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the poultice, and put it over the post-operative cautery, and cure that from another cure within which it is healthy.
If the wound is large, you should cut off the lips of the patient and treat that as gout that is customarily called.
If the pulse is rapid or slow, you should cut and empty the seat of the wound that has been closed for two days or three days until the plague ceases and the fever subsides; and then return to incise that which was closed.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of the stitch necessary in section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the incisions, and there are three species, which of those is the greatest, and of the others is smaller.
The form of the incision greatest is this:
The form of the incision smallest is this:
These are wounds of iron, of nails, of the extremities of branches that are gently bent, so that the stitch is firm in the openings.
And these are the forms of the wounds, and they are called wide, and one of them is called the bride.
When it comes to three species, four of them are large, smaller and fewer.
The form of the great experience is the form of me:
The form of the smaller experience is the form of me:
The form of the few experience is the form of me:
It is understood that these are for those wounds, fistulas, and abscesses that enter those bones and other causes:
And these pains are large, stones, and long, like great needles as those that are found in the shells, and are painful from lemons, or from iron, or silver, and the worse ones when they are from lemons:
And these pains are the experiences of black plums, which seem to be related to those that open the fistulas in their cavity, which are reflected as reflections of their levitation in those reflections:
And these are of three kinds, four of which are the longest, and others smaller, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and the stricture of it:
The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin,
It seems like the text is discussing the shape of an experienced gout (joint pain) patient. Here's a line-
by line translation:
The forms of the gout are special movements, four of which are simple ones, where only one curve is present, and there are three kinds: large, few, and medium.
And of their gout or punctures, and of the three kinds.
And if those gout points have different curves, and there are three kinds.
And of their punctures, there are three curves, and there are three kinds.
And all of this is necessary in their place.
The form of a simple few gout point, the form of it:
The form of a large gout point with two curves: The form of a medium gout point with two curves: The first line of the source sentence is "Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:" which can be translated as "The form of
The second line of the source sentence is "Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:" which can be translated as "The form of
The third line of the source sentence is "Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:" which can be translated as "The form of a
The fifth line of the source sentence is "E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquells es gran, migier, e pauc." which can be translated as "And these are the forms of the scalpels that are cutting and scraping the nodes and the attachments, and they are of three kinds, four of which are large, one is medium, and one is small
The sixth line of the source sentence is "Forma de scapel gran:
The seventh line of the source sentence is "Forma del scapel migier:
The eighth line of the source sentence is "Forma de scapel pauc:
The ninth line of the source sentence is "Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquells sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema." which can be translated as "The extramittents of those that are cut with sharp scalpels and the others with blunt ones, and not paused in such manner, but because it is well for the excoriation of the nodes the fear of inoculation of veins or nerves, and for those it heals the thigh and brings tranquility to a little by the adustion the which atrobes the excoriation of the attachment.
This is one of the forms of magical charms, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see in the examples.
These are the symptoms of the disease and its appearance, which is like alcohol.
And it is in the external part that has been punctured and hidden in the secretion of the parts of the fingers and nails, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spices, which are placed between the parts that you see in the perforation of the apothecary and do not penetrate the thighs, and there are three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of venesections that are used when the flow of the sinus is cut off, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of the blood:
These are the symptoms of the disease, which are round oranges in a certain length, and they are subtle.
When it comes to these kinds of winds, you need to use great, larger, and fewer doses, because for those that are fast-flowing and need to be drained quickly, and when you first begin, no medicine is needed.
However, do not use those winds to drain sang in the entire body, and only in fatty locations, as in the hips, thighs, breasts, belly, and genitals, and similar to those of fatty cartilage humors.
And some points are made by those instruments that are smaller and resemble the semblance of a needle; for which the sang is drained when it is made by fleebotomy, or you must incise the vein or artery.
And some points are round in shape according to this form.
Chapter 47.
Of the cure of the breasts of men who are assembled from women.
Some points are inflated in the breasts of certain men, you must give them the complement of sleeping when they begin to be hairy, and the points are inflated, and the breasts are assembled, and the breasts of women and Roman women, and legs.
When a person has gout, it is important to cut the affected area according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then clean the entire wound, and apply the medicated plaster, and adjust the edges of the plaster according to the size of the wound, and care for the affected area until it is healed.
If the nipple declines and is softened by its own weight, like in the case of women, it should be divided into two parts and placed side by side, in two similar lunar shapes, with each part contained in the other. When the larger one contains the smaller according to this form of the line from .B. to .G., and then clean the area that comes between the two lips of the plaster, remove the dampness, and apply what has been said about the suture and powders needed in the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision of this that is cut according to the patient's anxiety and the flow of sweat, and you cover that plaster with a cloth submerged in corrosive water and lay it over that which is corroded and comes from the skin, and care for that area until it is healed.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language similar to
I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French
I'm sorry for the confusion, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
If the plague is extended so that it causes bleeding, then you should administer the cautery in the same way as in the case where they have already had it done.
Chapter 49.
Of sections of gauze that occur due to arching or vein.
When the arching is torn and the cord is consolidated over it, then visible postulates occur in the area where the artery or vein is inflamed: for one, when the postulate is due to arching, it is added to the corner of the chest; and for two, when the postulates are felt in the thighs, you will hear stridor in it.
And that which is due to the vein is red in the manifestation of the chest.
And if there is an error in this postulate, and particularly in the ones you leave behind, and in the ankles, and in the collar, and in many parts of the chest; and it is very large, so that the cure should be avoided, and that which is in the extramits or at the top, it should be avoided.
When there is inflammation in the opening of the urethra, cut through the skin in that longitudinal direction; and then divide the urethra with uncinated sutures and the bladder, and leave the tunics within where it is discovered.
Place the plug over that hole and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the urethra with a double fascia in two places, which causes you to have difficulties in extracting the other urethras that are in the testicles.
And pour the liquid that is between two ligatures and it permeates throughout the entire part, and dissolve the gum.
And administer the cure in which the poison is introduced into the ligatures; and cure that which is conveniently placed within so that it becomes healthy.
And if the gum is caused by a vein cut, then you should know that you have it in your hand that is possible for the gum to be in your hand, and introduce the plug into the place where you have taken out the one that you have, and make it penetrate; and it should be in that double fascia within which you extract the other from the other side, and ligate the gum with a ligature according to what you said to me in the ligature of the four parts of the hand that are at the extremities.
If you fear that the thread may be pulled out, then enter the eye of the needle as it is located at that same loop, and stretch the threads in four places.
Dry the wound as much as possible in the location where it is and when you see that this is not enough, then insert the excess of the cloth into the codpiece, and cut off what is left of it.
Then stop over the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made of herbs and extracts to come out when it is healed.
Capitulate to the wound that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
How does the wound occur in the artery and vein, and it seems that the wound occurs in the nerves when they are struck or occur due to excessive work, and for similar reasons.
And if the pain is in the locations of the assistants or the heel, or in all places where the joints are painful.
And the wound is severe, and it resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of their dispositions and when they are stretched with great force, it feels like a stupefying sensation in the buttocks.
When the needle is not inserted into the chest, and the wound is closed, and it is completely healed and does not extend to other parts.
Therefore, those who are in the joints do not cover that they are covered with iron, for if you want to get rid of the contraction, you must use a forceps.
May that which is in the head or on the face not be saturated with blood. If it is an injection of little pain, then use that and cut off the part that is causing the inflammation.
And if it is large, then use that and exfoliate it, and remove that part; and adjust the wound to the suture, and cure that inside which is healthy.
End of Chapter.
Of the section of the injection that happens to the lip that happens to the stomach.
Endeven to the husband's cough that appears in the stomach of those and in other parts of the chest of those which are similar to those of the lungs, for the inflammation is subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are conversant, and it is of those who are small and of those who are magnificent.
When you have already seen it and looked inside, and in the abdomen of the patient there were two parts that were less like what they should be, and there was no difference between those white ones, of little importance.
And the lips of those were facing backwards and being made, and moisture ran throughout that entire time.
Then you inserted those and tightened them on the left foot, and the other on the right.
And the operation in the insertion of those is that you consider it good if the thigh is moist, and the color of the hernia is white, moist, of subtle importance; you insert them with salt, and they are in your presence at the focus, four watches after the section, the sanc is expelled without pain; and if you find the sanc, cauterize that.
And if you see the thigh swell and tremble, keep your hand away from the insertion of the hernia; rather, let not recent point be made on that hernia, and the one who has said so, and let it be held for two days.
And then adjust the stricture of the blood vessel; therefore, do not continue to tighten the blood vessel greatly, as it is separating and falling away from its own part.
If the member is large, there is often a cause of fear and pain, and especially in those that are in the stomach.
It is possible that you separate the joint of the member, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for that after it has been healed by the plague.
And be careful not to cut off the member that is of dark color, of little sensation, of long viewing, and that it is not cancerous.
And when you come to remember again in this way.
Chapter 22.
Of the eminent cure of the navel.
Eminence of the navel is caused by various motives; or by fissures of the umbilicus which is over the stomach, and it comes out of the intestine or hernia as in other ruptures; or by scarlet that flows from veins or arteries as it is said, or by stricture narrowed in it.
When the pain is in the abdomen and in the membrane, the color of the aposteme appears similar to the color of the chest; and it seems to come from various situations. If it is for the removal of the intestine, place its position in that place where they have found it with less violent diversity, and when you present that to the tylers, it is hidden, and then return it; and much more so is it for the intestine itself, and it is a great matter to open the abdomen and work with force.
If it is due to humidity, then you are a lion and it is not hidden when you present your hand to the patient's thigh, nor is it tightened, nor is it gripped.
And if it is for this reason, then you use these scars to appear as though the aphrodisiac is negating.
If it is for this reason, then you use a strong, thick, and heavy aphrodisiac that remains after a certain quantity.
If it is due to dryness, then you touch the lion's part with your hand.
And the operation in that part is considered a lion's eminence, whether due to castration by artery or vein, or dryness; you know that it is prohibited for the cure of the patient, for there is fear and no one knows how to do it in the capital where I have mentioned the aphrodisiacs by artery and vein.
When the prominence of the navel is in the belly or on the cloth, you should command that the patient holds the navel with both hands and extends it; and then, with a firm hold, command him to turn around between his own legs, and surround it with both hands over the navel's top, and extend the fingers of the hand holding the thumb on the navel's circuit; and then, in the circuit, stretch the finger of the other hand as far or as close as possible, and hold the other hand in front of the patient's face.
And then extend the fingers of the hand holding the thumb over the abdomen and insert the given digit into that point and wants the belly; and if you have not struck or held by the abdomen, then you should pull it out and push the belly to the parts of the stomach.
And if you have struck the cloth, then hold that with both hands; and insert the excess of it.
If it is contrary to your arc or vein, then surround that point with both hands and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them in those two firm places and enter two needles in the circuit around the navel in the hand holding the crotch, which threads penetrate; and stretch the navel over four parts on the needles.
If you want to remove the beads and clean the area where the flesh extends and falls on itself; or insert them when they are subtle and will fit, and carefully cover that part with what covers the incisions that are inside and are healthy.
If the eminence of the navel is flesh or due to moisture, then you must cover the opening with what you have said and avoid damaging the sanc or humidity, which damages it, and carefully cover that part with what covers and consolidates the area.
Capitol, liii. (This is a Latin phrase that trans
Of the treatment of carpentry. (This is a Latin phrase that refers to
It has been said, in the division, of the species of carpentry and in what manner it is treated by physicians, and that it is fevered in it by the physician who does not cause ulcers; and it has been said that carpentry is produced by the maid and caution in the treatment of the disease.
And cut the ancients that some carpentry is in place where eradication of the disease is possible, as for cran which is in the mamillas or in the cushion and to their likeness to the members allocated to scatter all that, and especially when beginning small.
When it is time to treat and examine the patient, you should not think that this is for your own good, but rather for the good of the patient, and that it may be beneficial for them.
When the operation is on, as we have said, it is because you precede and lay the patient down and take out the purgative of black blood, and then observe that, if it is greatly swollen with manifest edema.
And prepare the patient in the preparation that is located at the operation site, and then place on the tray those that cover that; and carefully examine all parts of the body with good intention to enter if there is no cause for the symptoms of the patient. And run the stitch, and do not leave that corner untied, and expose the wounds, and remove the stitch as much as possible from your hand or from the instrument you have at your disposal.
If you have any objection to using a large stitch in the vein or artery, then cauterize that within which the flow of the stitch is stopped, and cure that among those who are healthy.
Chapter 26.
Of the cure of gout.
We have already recommended in the division of the specifics of gout from the water, and the doses of each species for the cure of the patient by the physician.
When that which is cured is made of iron, it is not the same as the specialty of aluminum alone, and it is not similar to the specialty of drums or of ypocras, for it is mortal.
E when you have medicated this specialty of drum with medicines and it does not improve your condition, consider that if the thigh has already achieved flatness or is another one of this type of belly, as if there is in it a toss or stomach problem, then keep in mind that you should not use iron, because there is fear of that.
Mays if you see the thigh of abundance of virtue, and it is not another thigh but another type of drum so much, and neither child nor old, then the maneuver of the operation of the thigh is that you raise it between your own legs, and the minister expresses the stomach of it with its hand, extracts the water from the end of the penis, and prepares spines in this form:
It should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp end like spittle; but if it has any shortness little by little, then in the operation it will not enter into the intestine, and you will see that.
When considering the generation of gout, it is believed that the intestines play a role, as you can observe that the incision is made in the umbilicus for the quantity of three digits in the parts beyond, on the right side over the pubis.
If the generation of gout is due to the patient's laziness, your incision should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three digits.
If the generation of gout is due to the melasma, your incision should be on the right side.
It is not necessary for your incision to be on the side of the abdomen that you want to lance, as it may cause unnecessary bleeding in that location.
And with the instrument, perforate through the entire abdomen, and enter into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the abdominal wall and the siphon, and remove that; and if it is a small amount or an enema.
And with the cipher, perforate through the umbilicus, and enter where the spatula reaches, and that is the location of the water. And then extract that and enter an instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a silver canula; it is made of silver or gold or leather, of which in the part where it enters there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two of one type and one of another type; and it is the end of the instrument that is inscribed according to the pen of the hand, as many times as possible.
And on the extramition side there is an armillary sphere, four of which are placed over the instrument when it pierces the water, and you draw over the instrument so that the water is evacuated in that quantity, and if you do not cover the entire amount in that time, then the spirit animal may be resolved for the relief of the body, or it may be five cups that are approaching death.
More water is evacuated according to the quantity of the virtue of the body and according to what you mean by the dispositions of the body's virtue of the thighs and of beauty.
And then extract the instrument, and let the water that causes it flow out as much as possible, and retain that water which is held by the grip of the hand that holds the hole which is over the cipher that you are recommended to perforate with that according to the manuscript.
When the instrument is used on another day as many times as the patient can tolerate, and a small amount of water is extracted each time, and it is done for several days to avoid dehydration, and keep an eye out for any mistakes that may occur due to lack of water.
If you fear the patient and give them a large amount of water, treat them as if they were in a grave covered in sand, move their body in wet clothes, and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with desiccating medicines if they are healthy.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the mass is fitted as close as possible to the water extraction, according to what I have told you in writing that has been done.
Capital of Latvia.
Of the care of children who are born in locations other than the urinary opening.
Some women report that their child is born from the abdomen of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place).
Therefore, a cauterization is needed to perforate the membrane as little as possible, according to this form:
And then pause in the wound a small hook of lead and attach it to that, and do so for three days or until [it is] three hundred.
And when you want to urinate and have difficulty and pain; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine will come over the area, and this hook will not hold.
More of that which the wound is straight and is treated with a lead hook as they have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
More of those in which the wound is not in its place, it is ledge, which causes it to be short of those, the one that was born and the wound is due to the edge of the pubic bone because it cannot urinate in the parts below; and it is not of this generation, because so the sperm does not reach the deeper part, and it is wasted.
And the maneuver of the operation in you is that the thigh be placed over the right side, and extend the edge of the pubic bone of you to your left with vehement extraction, and insert the cap of the pubic bone of the location of the perineum into the hole that is rough like a lead hook, as if it were written with a pen, or that you do not know any part, so that the edge of the thigh seems like the cap of the pubic bone and the wound falls in the next location as it should.
You should pay attention to what happens in your operation of the urinary flow, as four things may occur to you; stop and take the remedy that has been prescribed for you, and care for the wound that has been made when it is healed.
This is a Roman numeral, which corresponds to the number 565
In the prepuce of the head of the penis, where the foreskin is located, and the neck and adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the penis, something may happen.
Visible things may occur to this foreskin in the penis and it is made of fleshy tissue.
And if one is malignant and the other is not.
Not malignant, but rather suspended under a fine thread and cut off that part within which the whole wound is located; and then cover it with a thin cloth over the Egyptian incision; and that, care for the wound with the remedy that has been prescribed for you, when it is healed.
And if the foreskin is malignant, apply a leg of cloth, and then administer cauterization to the incision and the root of the penis.
If the prepuce of the penis is not circumcised and one part of the prepuce is cut off and the other part is left intact, then you cover that part with skin that was cut at the beginning until it is consolidated; and when you treat that raw edge, be sure that it does not become infected.
And if there are already infections in the genitals and the black and wrinkled prepuce, then cover that which has already been damaged and which is about to be corrupted or corrupted; and apply a poultice of flour made from the crushed wheat and dried galls and thorns.
And when you treat that with the other cure, enter when it is healthy.
If there is an abundance of pus, then you administer cauterization with moon-shaped points in this manner:
Two types of cauterization are used, one for the pus and the other for the blood that becomes corrupted.
If the tip of the tail is corroded and destroyed completely at that time, you should cover that you insert into the meat of the prepuce a catheter for so that the urethra urinates for that.
In the attachment of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (and this attachment only occurs in the one where the prepuce is, and not on the circumcision; and when it occurs attachment due to phlegm or suppuration), you will find that you can extricate it with a slight spume if the cord is dissolved and the tip of the penis is entirely separated.
And if it is difficult to understand those things, you will find that you can extricate it with a slight spume from the tip of the penis and the cord, and so the prepuce, when it is very fine, is perforated by its fineness.
And you separate the prepuce from the tip of the penis with a fine spume, which is already wet in the urine so that they do not adhere to another surface.
And you apply a cautery if it has been consolidated.
Chapter 76.
Of the worldly education of children and the care of that which occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuous wounds like other plagues: but rather, it is necessary when it is our operation and our will, and we are doing it for the sake of the children, we must assign it to a better operation and let the fewer ones be saved.
Thus, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all of their slaves, as they did not use it in their laws, and this is because they have acquired by experience that the major part of artisans and barbers use circumcision and hygiene for novacula and torores; and they use false liament and inscizio on the ungla.
And I have already tried all these methods and did not improve the outcome of the operation for the surgeons, for it is not clear how the codon will be affected by the ungla, where four motas may escape from the codon, where the codon of the prepuce is in two tunics, and then the tonica is placed further, and then the doctor becomes frustrated with another incision and safe pain. When the wound is cleaned with aloe vera, and it is digital, the one who uses it is the barber, but the security of the end of the male member is not guaranteed, for it may enter into the wound of the man.
In the operation, you must be careful, for iron and corruption may spoil your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and there are no visible movements in that manner that does not require cleansing, and you have seen that one.
And the cleansing that you do with forceps and tweezers is not as good as it seems, for the sharpness of the forceps is not proportional to the sharpness of the tweezers; and when you make your own sharp ones and insert them into a wound in a short time, and you compress the wound with the figure containing the umbilical cord of the entire part, which does not have any error in total.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand upright if it is of those who understand a little, which you do not do except that you listen to the umbilical cord in its place and that you see that one enter another day.
When you have found that pleasure in the entirety of that member that is within your power to receive, then you will find that it brings you joy. Then make that member stand firmly prepared, and do not be ashamed; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind you, so that the child does not see those or other instruments.
Then insert your hand into the groove of that member and exhale into the codena, and remove that which is causing the pain at the top of the groove, and adjust it so that it does not cause deafness.
The form of the forceps in surgery, this is the form:
When some are too narrow and others too wide, it is not the key that fits, but the length of the narrow ones and the length of the broad ones compared to two thumbs engulfed.
When there is an error in world creation, it is often the case that one seeks to hide the inner code entirely, or to disguise a part of it.
And so, I extend my request to your time and ask that you do not disclose the secret of the location's apostemacy and that the second equality is kept hidden.
And if you cannot keep it secret, take out the other part and hide that as well.
If it has been three days and the post has been deflated, then you should enter as soon as possible to remove the post-coital pill, and cleanse that part with difficulty, and hide the second part that is prepared for you.
And keep the head of the post as a secret, so that it will not be known to him.
And then cure that part with the consolidated plague of the powders that have been recommended in the book of the powders.
And if it is hidden under the code, and follows the parts of it, then he will not know that.
When it comes to treating that gout that they have said is cured, it is important to follow the doctor's instructions carefully. This is because the treatment for gout can vary depending on the severity of the condition and the individual
This appears to be a reference to a specific section or chapter in the treatise
This translates to "Of the treatment of urine retention in the uterus." This suggests that the treatise may discuss medical procedures related to urinary tract
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling of the bladder due to stone or scarlet, or by inflammation or inflammation, and seems similar to those of gout that have been said about the division of the intestines. This suggests that the treatise may discuss the causes and symptoms of urinary tract infections and how they are treated
And if the doctor has not dissolved the gout properly, you should cover the cause on the thigh with a cold injection of the instrument called a hydrosyringe, which is made as follows: It is of silver and subtle leopard, and it is inserted in the subtlety of a long ray, like a palm and a thumb, at the end of which there is a subtle canal.
And the way to expel urine from that is to hold the doubled urethra and pull on the hair or beard for good drainage; and insert the extractions of the urethra into the part beyond the ring, and insert them into the clasp if there is any cause for the hair, more so with vehemence. And then smooth the border and album of the skin.
And place the uterus on the saddle, and rub the vagina with oil and olive and honey.
When the ring is inserted with ease into the opening of the thigh; and then bends the thigh down towards the abdomen; and presses the ring into that place; and presses it in as it enters the vesica, and cents the uterus being entered by the cause of the pain, and nothing else is done according to this order, except for the matter in which it is necessary.
And extend the urethra little by little, until the urine comes out through the lining.
Extract that and use the ring for cleansing the urethra, and continue to do so until it is empty and use the ring inside as the bladder is emptied and the uterus is relieved.
Chapter 17.
Of the quality of the castration of the vagina, it is clamped and similarly instrumented with those that are suitable for this purpose.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the uterus, or a cyst is formed therein, or there is a tear in the peritoneum, and you wish to distill water and medicines through that, then use a clamped instrument called the clamp, and this is the form of it:
If, during the extraction of the patient, the area is dark, it is closed. In that case, there are three parts: two of which are already known, and one is unknown. The two known parts are "dos de la una partida" and "ayssi quo vezes". "Dos de la una partida
In the beginning, it is located in which it is inflamed, and the second quantity that oppresses that, its addition, when any cause is brought to that torn part of the humors, it is attracted, and when it is expelled, it is attracted, and when it is expelled long, the third that is clamped is the one that phthysis naphtha in the battles of the sea.
When you want to prevent moisture in the vagina, insert the end of the clamp into the moisture, and draw it out with that which is pressed against the parts thereof, so that the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the clitoris.
And insert the extremity of the clitoris into the urethra as has been recommended in the circumcision; and press upon that moisture with which you press, so that this moisture reaches the vagina most quickly, and the thighs come to that place.
The form of the cristae is subtle, and this is the form:
And if it is made of silver or lead, of the which the cap may appear to be like a small pen, and from it a thread is drawn.
And take the vagina by motion, and stop in that moisture which you want to cristae in the vagina, and place it between two with great care, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And insert the end of the cristae into the urethra.
When you approach the patient's thigh, gently stretch it and apply pressure to the area where the humidity has penetrated the vagina, as that humidity has already permeated the vagina.
If you do not have a vagina, take a gauze and wrap it around that circle; then pierce it completely through that; and enter it firmly into those holes, so that it is released; and add the circle so that it is added also, as if you are holding that amount of humidity that you want to hold in your humidities, and openings.
And then tie that to the instrument and make it as you made it in the vagina, and express it inside where the humidity has entered into the vagina.
Chapter 60.
On the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already mentioned in the division the species of stone and its treatment in medicine, and the difference between stone produced in the testicles and stone produced in the vagina, and their treatments.
The first line of the text says: "E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccion.
When the stone is generated in the true vesica, it is that which is found in the vesica.
And you relate this to that clear and concise explanation.
Therefore, say that the stone generated in the true vesica is actually seen in children; and from the halves of it comes urine that seems like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the thigh covers its privy parts, and moves its legs, and is dressed; and a little later, it opens the mouth in the motion of those.
And it is wonderful that the pediatric care of those who have reached twelve years of age; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In the young, it is easier to find that which is between those.
And of that which is the stone that is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is opposed to that.
Therefore, how to reach the cure of that, come at the beginning of that which is described by Christians who see the thigh that extragua the entire fence that is in their own buttocks; and that fence some veins prohibit the envy of the stone, you must do the inquisition of it.
When the pain is felt in the knee and it is swollen and hard to the touch due to which the stone descends into the prepuce of the urethra or jumps from one place to another, then...
And place that dressing between your own prepared parts, and the other parts of her are placed with cushions under them, so that the entire urethra is made to descend to the parts outside.
And make sure that this and the entire dressing is clean.
If you feel the stone in the space, then carefully cut it as much as possible over it.
If the entire part does not touch, then you should cut it as much as possible with the left hand of the patient, if the knee is childlike, or with the right hand if it is fully grown, and insert that into the vagina. And make sure that the stone goes in when you insert it. And gradually insert it into the top of the urethra.
And press on that with your finger, and expel it from the parts outside to the location where you cut it.
And command the attendant to press on the vagina with her own hand; and command another attendant to have her left hand extend the labia to the parts below, and have her other hand tighten the suture that is now holding the labia in place, from the location where the incision was made.
And then enter the spatula and insert it into the incision so that this is the form of the ligament: And cut it off in that place where the thigh and labia meet, not in the middle, but rather at the left cushion; and let the incision be over the said thigh and the knot be transverse, so that the incision is wide and not too tight, according to the amount of the thigh that can be cut off, and not more, for if the knot is in the thigh, the incision must be made on the thigh, and it is forgotten its deficiency.
And you know that from the thigh there is some angle and margin, for the incision of which it is difficult to make.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This condition resembles a lion's roar, and is round in shape. It is made up of the leucorrhea and the salted meat.
If it is that which causes the angles to be bent and twisted, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten, you must know what to do about that, or how gently to apply pressure on the part where the pain is felt most, as if you were pressing on the heel of your hand, and not forcing it; or if you must use an instrument with a curved end.
If you cannot do so on that part, then amplify the hole with a small tool, and if you see flame, decrease the pressure on that part which has been made acidic by the vitriol.
If the foot is of a different size, then at the beginning you push the foot into the opening of the vesica and place it over it; and then push a small amount of water in; and seemingly make such movements if they are fewer than ten.
If the stone is large, ignorance is that you have inserted it into that great section, which then happens to the thigh: whether it is alive or not, and whether it remains in the continuous urine distillation, so that the place is not fully consolidated.
May the expulsion of the stone be made as soon as it is outside, or use an engine in the fracture of the stone that goes out through the urethra and is placed in pressure.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the plague with aloe and dragon's blood ointment, and strengthen it. And place over that drape the enfused oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and water, so that it does not cause swelling.
And return the thigh to its original position, and do not slide the limb inside the third day.
Then when it has slid, wipe the place with water and oil, and apply creams to that part twice a day until it is healthy.
If plague occurs in the thigh, there is inflammation and ulceration, and it appears as if the bone is frozen in the vesica, and for that reason the prohibited urine (and this is known by the exit of the urine from the kidney) is inserted into the said plague and the frozen sac is extracted, so that the bone does not cause the vesica to rot and putrefy.
Then wash the plague with water, salt, and water, and in its opposite position, it is suitable for the cure to enter when it is healthy.
And cover the plague in all the curing hours that you lie down and adjust the medicines that are placed over the area.
And if the gravel is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and it sticks to it, and urine is prohibited, then you cure that by using what I recommend when you come to cut, because many cases of this curing have been accused of cutting; and I have already done so, and this is the form of it:
When there is a triangular extrusion of the humor, it becomes hard and solidifies into a knob.
Then hold on tightly, and tie it with the skin to prevent it from returning to the vagina.
Then insert the iron into the skin, easily piercing it with that piercer into the penis. Then rotate the piercer in your hand and into that penis little by little, and you will perforate the perforation of the urethra so that you can penetrate the other part; then the urine will be completely excreted.
Then press your hand over it and on that which is raised from the penis, where it is thin, and it becomes thin again, and the urethra is forgotten by the urine, and the thigh is healed.
If this cure does not suit you for any reason that prevents you from doing it, then tie the penis with a knot on the tip and another one on the root. Then wrap around the penis in that vagina between two layers of cloth. And then extract that part. When you have removed the limb and modified the sinew, which is made in the plague.
And it is not necessary to remove the limb from the bone, but because it does not return to the cavity, and the other limb also descends, when you uncover the bone of the foot, the coda returns to its place and seizes the plague.
And so it is necessary for you to know when you have uncovered the bone, that you raise the coda to its parts, or that you return the best complement, and seize the plague with those who have said.
Capitol.lxi.
Of extracting stones from female feet.
Stones in female feet are rarely generated.
If you see stones in any of those, the cure is difficult and it is prohibited by force-feeding.
One of them is that the woman is very strong and sees it.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very wise that can take it when it is cast, or is of the women who have not been circumcised.
When you have finished opening the space between the patient's thighs, you will not find any female attendants who know this art, particularly the operation of making points.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision on the heel in women is longer than the location of the heel, so it requires a larger incision, and there is fear of that.
If necessary, you must believe that I have a female apprentice who is skilled and few in number.
If you are private about that, you should find a female apprentice who is subtle and skilled, or present a female matron who is experienced in the art of women, or a female who has learned this art from it.
Therefore, make that presentation, and command the person to perform all that you will tell them, from the examination of the heel to the beginning; which causes them to look if the woman is pregnant, believe that you say the place you want in the buttocks of the person and want the heel.
If that fears you, take that away from here, and command the person to insert it where you said.
If the secretion does not appear, command the midwife to enter her fingers into the vagina and inquire about the pain on the left side of the bladder, and compress that good compression.
If it does not improve, command the midwife to gradually insert her fingers into the vagina at the points on either side of the bladder, and compress that good compression.
And place the hand over the area of the vagina where the bladder is located, and adjust the position of the cushion according to the part that is comfortable for you and center the penis in that area, and it should not cause discomfort in the vagina.
And the incision is small at the beginning; and command the midwife to insert her fingers into that incision, and if she feels the penis, adjust the size according to the amount that you know that the penis will enter that part.
You know that the parts of the penis are motes: four of those are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
This is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text you provided is a continuation of the previous text, and it seems to be a conversation between a doctor and a patient.
If you wish to remove blood clots, adjust the site where it was inserted and leave it there for an hour until the clot is dissolved, and then return to your operation when the stone is out.
And prepare yourself with the instruments you need to say in the removal of stones in men, so that you can help those in your operation.
If you wish to remove blood clots and know that the expulsion of the clot is from the artery that was inserted, then stop dusting over the place and stretch the skin with powder and do not return there; and remove the stone and do not pull it out, for if you die, your wife will be left a widow. And cure the plague.
So when the sharpness of the clot is reduced to a small amount and the area becomes wet, then return to your operation when the stone is out.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text "Capit
It seems like you're providing a single line of text in Latin. Here's my best attempt at translating it into English
Hernia is not merely an addition of moisture in the white vessel, which is left with the codon of the genitals containing the heart, and is called a vessel.
And some veins are in the proper fascia of which the prepared nature is in the part of the heart, if it is such that there is another heart; and the codon of the genitals is between the white vessel which I have said, and it is not called anything except tar.
And the generation of this hernia is by decreasing that affects the genitals, because it comes to be this material in those, and some things happen by striking a point on the genitals.
And this moisture has different colors, either the color of it is like lemon or red or blood, or black excrement, or white mucous, and it is said that it is more.
And the ways by which this addition of water is cleaned are those for this: if it is in the white vessel which I have said, then you should reduce a little lengthwise as a figure of the heart, and appear the genitals, where the moisture counts that of all parts.
If moisture is in the original pancreas, then you should remove a part of it and believe that there is another one inside.
If moisture is between the spine of the genitals and the white bone, then you should pull it out as far as possible.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, spread the color of the moisture on the post or piece of wood that follows; and then, according to what is seen in the appearance of the post, judge from there what it should be cut down.
Then when you come to the treatment of the iron wound, make sure that the dressing is clean and as possible, and sometimes the part of the body.
And if it is placed over the supine back for any cause, and stops the movement of the cloth.
And place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the attendant to follow the right side of the patient, who extends his arm from the left hip to the lower part of the spine of the genitals and the lower part of the belly.
And take some sweat and cut the spine of the genitals in the lower part of the patient's place according to the length of the pin.
When the cut is made along the second line of the groin, which is the line of the male genitalia, it should be made with a straight edge that is perpendicular to the white bone.
And remove it, and observe, and keep hold of it for your own safety so that you do not inscribe it; and your excision is the one that you remove part by part that is suspended by the lesser girdle and carefully scrutinize the excision according to the quantity that you can.
And make a wide hole in the white bone, and remove all the water.
And separate the two lips of the cut along the second line, and extend the white bone to the parts below; and do not touch the girdle of the male genitalia, and inscribe the white bone in the hand that you can hold. And inscribe it completely or in the buttocks, and mainly the lower part, for if you do not scrutinize it carefully, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
If the girdle of the male genitalia is processed in that place at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the cut of the white bone, return it to its place, and adjust the lips of the girdle of the male genitalia as they were before the suturing, and care for that wound like the others, entering if it is healthy.
If the man's heart has become corrupted by another disease, then you should cover those parts that are causing the pain, and remove the heart, and properly care for it as they have said.
If the pain is aggravated in several parts of the body, you know that those are the hernias; therefore, insert the needle in the next position where you made the previous incision; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then you do it.
And if you want to remove the piercing, and enter the underlayment lana that is immersed in oil or pink oil; and place another lana that you have immersed in water and oil on top, and expand it over two genitals and the mirror of the stomach; and fold the cloth and powder, and make them like this according to the following form:
And if the pressure of the two cloths and their humps of lana carmenada according to this resemblance; and their points are at the ends that are pressed by the thorn or wet lana, and they are added to the structure in the braie of the braies, and the first pregnant at the end of the two, and the second at the end of the pantenilh, and two extramits at two cushions ahead and two more at two gussets, and all the extriction is adjusted in the braie of the braies.
When some of these artificial hernias are treated with cauterization instead of cutting; and that is, you take a subtle cauterizing iron and insert it into the codon of the gutten, and then light it after they have reported that they have found the white bladder containing water, and you then take cauterization in this manner: It seems like the text is written in a language similar to Greek. Here's a possible translation of the sentence:
Then, it is drilled into that bladder, and it is lit when all the water has been removed.
Then, extend the bladder with wires, and scrape it with wires, and scrape the cauterizing iron with the fire; and insert it secondly as close as possible to you when you have eradicated all of it, and keep hold of the fire that does not touch you.
You know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than an incision operation.
If you have any objection to using cauterization at the time of incision or during cauterization or the infusion of salve, remember that this opposition is for your own good and that the cure which corresponds to this second method is the one that is said to be best.
When the patient's thigh is painful and they fear the second operation due to its horror, you should administer the following injection as recommended by me; and it is when you certify that you must, for that which has been said about the meanings, that this hernia is harmful.
You should cover the thigh with any raised cushion, making sure to perforate the abscess in the lower part of the spatulate, and then pause the perforation according to its length on the side of the chest.
And if the abscess is wide, I will remove it completely.
Then place your hand over the wound and hold it there, to prevent the wound from getting worse. And treat that wound after the plague is cured.
When the pain of the hernia is against the wind in that hour you are perforating it: and this is not done except for that which the white gauze in the orifice of the plague causes contrariety and prohibits the eschar from forming, you should cover the plague with penitence or instrument of the kind by which the hernia is extracted from the abscess, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the plague a little.
You should know that the urine returns, and it is excreted approximately after three months or less; and when it is added, you should be perforated second by that same hand, as the patient will pass those days.
The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
It appears to be written in a medieval form of Latin, similar to the languages you mentioned. However, without more context, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation. The text you
It seems that the text is discussing a surgical procedure on a hernia, and there is concern about potential complications. The phrase "dimissio de lu" may refer to the release or removal of the hernia, and the phrase "esser salvat per aquela milhor" could mean "to be saved for that better." However, without more context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation.
It appears that the text is discussing the operation on the hernia and the specifics of the surgical instruments used. However, without more context, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation. The phrase "apostemas" may refer to
It seems that the text is discussing the origin of the surgical instruments, which are made from the bones of animals. The phrase "genetius" may refer to the bones of larger animals, such as cattle or deer, while "superfluitat aguda agra" could refer to sharp, pointed bones. The phrase "per percuscio" may refer to the process of cutting or carving the bones into the desired shape for the surgical instruments. However, without more context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation.
It appears that the text is discussing the color of the surgical instruments and how it relates to the color of the bones used to make them. The phrase "es atrobat en lu dolor" may refer to the instruments becoming dark or discolored due to the pain caused by the surgery. The phrase "es
When the wound is deeply infected, of which the color is dark and does not heal, it is called an abscess.
Some swelling is caused by obstruction of the arteries, and by inflammation of those veins that are already perceived as having a remembrance of the pain, or by inflammation of the veins.
Moreover, that which is known as inflammation of the arteries is due to the dispersion of the wound when you compress that part with your hands; and it does not matter if it touches.
However, that which is called inflammation of the veins is not dispersed by any cause due to the compression with your hands.
And it is possible that on this side there is cutting and on the other sides; and it is that you insert the key of the generative organs, and extend that of the white blood, and untie the suspensory cords of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensory strings that you untied from the whole part of the parts of the seed.
If the blood has already been solidified in those hardened tissues, then you should cover that you are taking out the blood and leaving it inside.
And if there is adhesion entering any cause of the cist, or between what is between the bellies, then you should cover that you remove all that adhesion and leave it inside in a round incision.
If the cause of the adhesion is from flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then you should cover that you leave all that is behind in its place and take out the blood as has been said.
When you have completed your operation, fill the woolen pledge with red oil and vinegar, and then care for that as for the other cure that has been made when it is healthy.
Capital. This is a Latin word meaning "capital" or "principal.
Of the cure of hernia that is from protrusion.
Protrusion is surrounded by some envelope-like structure resembling a softening of the testicles, and it becomes difficult to perform movement and walking over the thigh.
In the treatment of this disease, there is fear for the cause that was previously remembered.
The first source sentence translates to: "However, we should speak of operation in the second part where we mentioned the first.
It says that you should cover the patient's genitals with a pillow; and lift the testicles to the parts where they belong; and tie the codpiece of the genitalia at the knots that you show on the penis; and hold onto those other servants that you, and extend them vehemently.
And insert your hand through the anus, making sure to go through the transverse section in the right direction, if the rectum is discovered.
And clean all parts of the body that you have mentioned in the extraction of the gallbladder, which are located in the templates.
And fix a needle in that which is a true double hole, and tie it to the first of the places where the vital organs are located, and tie it to another one watched at the bottom of them. And insert those into the lower part of the body through a transverse section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added by the fetid and corrupted humors.
And cure the plague by curing the other plagues in which you want to be born, and that cause the rectum, which does not have two testicles, to be equal to two, which is not bad for this.
If you suffer from pain in all the joints, it is necessary to cover those testicles or those testicles because they are not nourished by the scrotum due to the incision of the scrotum, and they are fixed, or they are pulled so that they do not become inflamed.
The text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish,
However, it seems to be in a language that is similar to medieval Latin and French. Here's a line-
The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that ends on the cecum, extended over the abdomen from the inguinal parts of the stomach, so that the intestines of that rupture are at the anus.
This rupture is either of the femoral or epigastric artery, and it occurs due to specific causes: either by trauma, such as percussion, incision, or clamor, or by elevation of a heavy cause, or by semblant.
When gout occurs due to cold humors that spread throughout the body, it happens gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is often caused by the intestine entering the abdomen when the gallbladder compresses the intestine.
When the gallbladder is cut due to gout, it causes severe pain immediately; and various apparent symptoms appear further away from the original point, and this is due to inflammation of the intestine, and the cause of this is the intestine being damaged in parts of the gallbladder.
And some parts of the intestine are forgotten by the gallbladder, and this is called the inguinal hernia.
And some parts of the intestine are caused by ventilation, and some parts of the intestine are in the abdominal cavity and are held there, and there is great concern for the health of the patient, and some parts cause severe pain that becomes more prominent when moved.
And in the treatment of the spices of this disease, there is fear that it may be escaped from the wound, because it is difficult to avoid the scar.
The first source sentence translates to: "The hand of the operation for that part commands the patient's leg to be bent at the knee so as to fit snugly into the parts of its cavity, and to have the hands placed over the thighs, and to lift the changes of the intestine.
When the rib is stretched that holds the testicles in place, and inserts them into the cavity of the body, and then fixes them in place with a stitch in the second pair of labia, as instructed to open the incision; and then covers the edge of the section with another layer of skin.
If the section is larger than what you can remember, then the operation will be forgotten.
And if you remove those hooks that hold the testicles in place, then the white bone of each part is discovered.
Then you enter the said tool into the testicle, into the white bone that is in the cord of the man, and into the second white bone, and release the adhesion that is in the back of the man.
And if you remove the cord of the testicles from the parts in front, and extend the white bone on both sides, and lift the man with the white bone to the edge of the section; and command the minister to extend the man further and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the filled solution.
When it comes to the belly, it is said that there is no cause for the intestine to be enveloped in the white hard bone. If you suspect any cause, then examine that on the belly.
And if you proceed to cut into the part of the back that follows the crack of the testicles, then you will find that it runs through sanctity and sanity, as they have said in this treatment.
And apply wool immersed in oil and rest on the plague; and apply the limb that has been recommended (and some white veins are cauterized, which have said the incision of the thighs of flux of sanctity, where several veins fall) and make the limb enter so that if it falls.
If the pain of the thigh is slow, then you must drink cold water and rest on that side that falls, as they have said.
And cure the plague with another care of the plagues inside that is healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of ventricular hernia.
In this hernia it has not been seen that what was being done was being done in the care of the patient by the surgeon.
And the first thing that was done was to say that it is done as they have recommended in the hernia that is done; the which is what you see the ways on the cut over the difficulty of the patient; and you dry in the middle of the environment where the post is made, if the vessels fall.
After treating the plague according to what has been said, enter and see if it is cured.
This appears to be a date, specifically November 57th in the Roman calendar.
Of the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Some have seen a rupture in the ankles as has been said, and they have opened the place.
And do not cause any harm to the intestines in the belly; and if you do, it is rare; and return to its place in all hours.
If the time is prolonged, a fissure is made in the gallbladder where you place the intestine in the gallbladder; and this happens due to the extension of the gallbladder which is in the ankle as has been said, which causes the gallbladder to extend, and it is softened and the place is opened and it is removed.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as has been preceded in the story of it.
And some have been cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient places the thighs over the shoulder of the other, and it dries the place of the rupture of the intestines which is cut by the gallbladder according to the quantity of three times.
When you have approximately strengthened the white cipher that is inside which is discovered,
And hold the ray and place it over the prominent part of the chest, and press it against the stomach.
And hold the back parts over the extremity of the ray of the chest, and adjust one part to the other.
And pull the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the chest, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause as you will know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
And treat that as in the treatment of diseases, and when you insert the wounds, cleanse that and restore the hernia within which it is consolidated; and the chest contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place, where it is pushed for health.
Capitol, Chapter 88.
Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Visible motions of the cord of the testicles in healthy men are softened by heat, wherein the cartilages that are between those are softened, and the observation of that is facilitated.
When it is necessary to treat the patient who has injured their thigh according to the doctor's order, and has fully extended the limb that was softened over the natural knee; and if you adjust the lips to the suture.
And if you want, in the beginning the excess of the softened limb is divided into three or four parts and a fixed suture is made.
And insert between the sutures; and take care for the cure of the other diseases after it is healed and the wounds have closed.
Capitulum lxxix.
Of Castration.
You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, mainly because of this reason that I remember to you in this free book; and it is not necessary to remind you of it except by a few hands, one of which is the hand of the doctor when he is entombed in that, knowing the cure of the animal that happens to it; and the other hand is that we have need of castration of other animals for our purposes, as for mules, and for pigs, and for pigs, and for the like of them.
I say that dissection is done in two ways: either by cutting or by making a slit in sections.
In that which is done by cutting, the way of the operation is to make the beast fall in water with its tail inside, having made it soft and smooth and having hung it. And hold those by your hand inside them if they are resolved and do not show outside the touch.
In dissection done by cutting and making a slit, you will have the beast and press the girdle of the testicles of the other side with your hand.
And tie the suspensors, and place them over each hole after one slit between two holes made.
And place those that will have to be extracted. And do not let anything over those of the cecum except the subtle cecum which is over the veins.
And this way of dissection is better than that which is done by cutting, for when a deep cut is made, the testicles are affected and the beast wants to fight.
And when the plague is cured, it should be cleaned.
Chapter 70.
Of the cure of gout.
Gout in men is treated with two methods: one is to cut or burn it, if it appears in water that the space between the testicles is enlarged, and in the one that is between the two testicles, a quarter of a female figure appears in the quality of which it is.
And some observations have been made on that urine which is in the testicles' cavity.
In women, there is a specialty: it is that the horn of the woman over the pentile is situated as two testicles of a man, a little lower and to the side, as the horns of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two men and one of the women's species. And it seems that you have made those adjustments within which the decay of that is expelled, and that you cure the other plagues with that cure.
When in the second part of men, where urine is produced, which is in the abdomen of the testicles, there is no cure or operation.
Chapter 21.
Of lingering and swelling of the flesh, caused by female causes.
Lingering is much increased when the cause is natural and is exposed to examination; and some are magnified in certain women to such an extent that they resemble those in men and spread throughout the body during intercourse.
However, you should have the surplus of lingering in your own body or in another's and insert it.
And do not remain in insertion, but rather at the root of the penis, for it does not allow for the flow of sperm.
And apply this cure when cured to those plagues that were cured.
The less flesh that is swollen is the more flesh that is filled within, and it is much more swollen in certain parts than in others; therefore, we should insert it as we insert lingering, and cure that which is cured.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in the language you described and does
This line translates to "Of the cure of gout." In this context, "alratic
This line translates to "Gout is that it does not penetrate the female genitalia, or if it does, it is small." In this context, "alratica" refers to gout, and the text is discussing its impact on the female body. This line translates to "And is it natural or accidental?" The text is asking
This line translates to "Accidental is due to the fault of that which preceded, and it is made or due to nothing adjusted or to a subtle and small gout." In this context, "accidental" refers to gout that is not a natural occurrence, but rather a result of some other factor. The text is suggesting that accidental gout can be caused by a
This line translates to "And it is made or in the prelude of the month, or in the costazes of the month, or in the pus of the month, or in the base of the month, and forbids copulation and enprengagement and childbirth, and very much forbids menstruation." In this context, the text is providing advice on how to prevent accidental gout. It suggests that certain activities, such as copulation, enprengagement, childbirth, and menstruation, should be avoided during the prelude of the month to help prevent gout.
This line translates to "And the knowledge of that is made by paying attention to the menstrual cycle, if the pregnancy is apparent, prompt; but if it is not apparent, then you should closely watch that with the ties or with the ray." In this context, the text is providing advice on how to determine if a woman is pregnant and how to prevent accidental gout. It suggests that paying attention to the menstrual cycle can help identify signs of pregnancy, and that if pregnancy is not apparent, then close observation of certain body parts,
When labor pains are caused by a subtle obstruction, and they occur in the lower abdomen, then you should gently cut and separate them.
And if you place your hand over the lower abdomen, and then pause the ties that indicate the end of the child's head,
And if the woman is lying on her back, with her thighs extended, and you extend her lower abdomen as far as possible, then break through that subtle obstruction and open the labor pains.
And take some lint and bind it with thread, and place that over the area to keep it moist, and apply it every day until that area is fully consolidated.
And if the obstruction is large and dense, then you should cover that area with something that will not cause inflammation or infection.
And if labor pains are caused by flesh, then you should suspend that area and apply something to keep it moist.
And if they are in pain, then give them the medicine that stops the flow of their menstrual blood, and apply something to keep it moist, and apply something to the album of the thighs.
And then administer a wide-bore catheter for the purpose that the pus will not solidify too quickly.
Hold that part for the joints and administer calcium liquid to that part.
And it will be cured when it has been healed by the other curative process that has been done.
And some things happen in the more advanced stages of other animals, and it is necessary to follow this method. If it is for cranial apothecary, the cranial apothecary that is in the head should not be made against the grain of this method.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure of hematomas, hernias, and red blotches that occur in the womb of women.
Hematomas are appreciated of the openings of the veins that are within them and not continuously corrupted, and as they are old hematomas and are causes of pain.
And I have already said in the division the specialties of those and the sanctions of those, and I direct those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
When those are those that cause pain in the larger wound, those are the ones that have been treated.
And cover the female with a large cloth and extend it over the forfexes, or over something else, and insert those into the wounds.
And sprinkle over those dues the fluxes of the plaster of one of the inscissive powders, as it is and seems to those.
And press the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in warm water.
And if the fluxes of the plaster persist, then make that salve with sumat, scorsas of milgrantas, and similar ingredients.
And then take flour of ordi and comfy it with honey and if you see that it agrees, make plaster with that water on the back of the patient.
And if the plaster comes off, it is; and otherwise, make it stick to two ventouses, and to the patient's scarification.
And then take wool and submerge that in the oil of coliandre or the oil of arnagloza or the oil of guarravier, and if it is painful, make it stick to the place; and cure the place with enguentz when it is healed.
And take care of that entrance which is safe.
Capitulare, Book 74.
A surprising occurrence has happened in the intestine.
Special symptoms of abscesses occur in the intestine, such as cracking and abscess formation, ulcers, erosions, and other abscesses, eruptive fever, and phlegmons. And you have already mentioned these diseases and their special symptoms, as well as the cures for them in each division.
And do you ask in this book of abscess what happens in the intestine when an abscess is formed, and if you want to know how the operation of the iron is performed?
However, if you consider that the pain of the abscess in the leg begins suddenly with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it tightens and if you feel that sensation, then do not perform a puncture, but help that abscess as much as possible to help with the maturation of the entrance when the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And you should know that you are making the woman lie down on a pillow that has pillows; and lean back on your side and adjust your buttocks to the part where the belly is, and your thighs should be expanded, and lift your knees away from your chest, and place your hands on your chin, and this will be convenient for you.
And the midwife should follow the route and administer the instrument that is used to open the birth canal, in the form which will be useful for those causes that they will perform.
And know when you want to administer this instrument that you have made for the woman's cervix, and be sure that the instrument does not enter more than the cervix and the vagina. If the instrument is larger than the cervix, you should know that you should put powder on the texture of the cervix so that the instrument cannot enter into the cervix of the woman.
And know that you should stop the string that runs through the instrument of the midwife and that the midwife holds the instrument and rotates the string while the birth canal is being opened.
When the inflammation appears, and it is touched to the chest and neck, and there is sweating, you must cover that with something to prevent the wind from reaching the head of the patient.
When the fever is discharged, you must cover that in the bath with a container of olive oil or rose oil containing some salts; and put the thermometer in the arm pit of the patient.
And cover the patient's chest and over the wet wool that is submerged in water in which molds are built.
And it will take approximately two days to cure, as that is what is customary for the patient to come in when they are cured.
And some of the patient's clothes are washed and their chest is wet with water that is crushed by heat and melted, and in which long-haired Liris or Aristotle's herbs are boiled, and it returns to the cure.
And if the fever is discharged in the patient's wet clothes, you must cover that the patient has been prohibited from the cure of the fever, as there has been cured by that fever what they have said in the division.
I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a language similar
I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language I can recognize or translate. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language I can recognize or translate. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language I can recognize or translate. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
When there is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to avoid error and deception.
When you are showing the entire figure of those, and which engine is in them for what purpose and has been over it.
When the point is situated on the heel of the foot according to natural geometry, and that is very hard for the man and is made in that difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it is weakened, then they make that seal, or have the women hold it, and evaporate the congestion of the man's fenugreek and his old humors.
And then enter the mercury between those small and thin spats, or it follows that second time within which water comes to that part which is in her of humidity. And press the belly of the woman when she desires the foot.
If she does not desire it, then you should know that the woman is crystallized with the mucilage of the ptill and the mucilage of fenugreek in her.
And then command the woman, the crystal, that it be broken and make a seal on it; and take the mouth of the woman and put in her by hand for an hour, quarter the foot so that it does not become too much.
If the more important joints of the foot are forgotten at the beginning, you should gradually reduce those points with ease. If the intramuscular injection is not obeyed, you should place your hand on a table and lift the leg of the patient, and then carefully place the table on the ground; and the table should be held so that it does not fall due to the concussion.
If the more important joints of the foot are not turned and the foot is cold, you should insert those and extract the romance from the foot or connect the corset to the side of the patient's thigh, and then that will be forgotten.
When the foot is on the patient's feet, you should carefully push those in, and gradually convert the foot small, and gently pull that, and gently take a part of the leg and extend those small by small.
If the embryo is entering between the thighs, you should command that it be expressed, and make that extruded condition, as if God wills, so that it will be forgotten.
If you do not forget that they have recommended, if you return that small part little by little when you pause the second natural figure, that will help you remember and ease the pain.
If you are prohibited from doing that which they have recommended, then use a piece of linen and dissolved gum, and apply it all over the mortar with good percussion, and line up as much as possible the course of the female part, the base of the abdomen of him. And apply that cream on the skin, when you get the hypochondria.
When the points you have left in him are lenificated, then apply his sub-smoking of maitre and sub-pause at that to him. When the sub-smoking has been applied for an hour, then apply it on a piece of cloth, and make it swell and extend the mouth of him, and take from that, and press the point pushed below the abdomen of him with light compression, so that the small part will not be forgotten.
Inflammation of the joint while a finger is inserted. Be careful in reducing the hernia, but if you cannot reduce it, raise the woman and make her do that.
If it is not possible to proceed, make an incision on the lay, and compress the thighs of the patient with strong force, and appropriately administer liniments that you have and recommend with ointments.
If the child comes out, make this cauterization on the belly, and study over the reduction of the mouth, and cut off the second natural figure, and make the woman sternutate and command that it goes in where it is forgotten.
The fetus is described as expanding its legs and the abdomen of the woman is at the second stage of labor. The midwife should hold the fetus' foot and roll that small part over and over again, and it will be easier.
And when it is done and it has been cut off, and you stop over the abdomen of the woman as they have recommended with oil and ointments.
And when you command her to push little by little, and when she has given birth, make this cauterization on one thigh and command her to be inclined to the right side, and command her to be sternuted; and make that woman sternutate more easily. The exit of the fetus is prepared on the side.
When the patient has had horrific pain from this remedy, consider it, and then insert your thumb into the second nail that has been inserted within the gland when it is empty.
And if the nail is hung on the face and neck, then insert that into the belly button, so that it does not stick and will not hurt.
And then push the nail into the parts of the finger that you have paused, and tell the woman to look at her hands, and if she does not forget to remove it as soon as possible, so that God or fate may help her.
End of the labor pains of many fetuses. You know that many movements of the fetus are natural, and some women have three or four, and it is strange and painful to endure; but this is not due to nature, and I do not live.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, one nail, and are separated by ciphac, distinguish those that enter the ligament of each of those and some women have forgotten to remove them as soon as possible, and some have been removed by an unnatural delivery, and some have been left behind because they have not been recommended.
If these pains are difficult to bear and you cannot reach the natural figures that have been described, then care for those parts as they have been reported.
If the midwife is skilled and can easily and subtly touch the part, it will be facilitated and subtle, and will also be time-saving, and should be knowledgeable about each figure according to the one being prepared for the healing.
Remember that this is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Some are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighteenth, and you must now verify that a woman aborts only at the fifth, and another at all forms, which causes pain due to the measurement of the glorious savors.
And it is also important that the midwife knows as much about this appearance as possible, and then she should act accordingly.
Chapter 76.
Of extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you are treating the dead fet, it is said in the division of medicine and not to be deformed, and you have attempted to use it as an operation, considering that the female is of healthy virtue and not of those accidents by which she suffers loss.
You consider that the female is lying on the bed over the left side, and her head is inclined to the east and her thighs are raised.
He should hold that part or keep her on the bed so that this does not extend and the extraction of the fet is necessary.
And you wet the mouth of the older woman with oils, humors, membranes, and seed of liver and fenugreek.
And you apply the midwife her oils and humors, and you enter them into the woman's mouth, and you surround the woman's face with the aid of the midwife in the older one, and you locate the place where the teeth are in the fet.
And you choose the appropriate place: then you consider if the fet is prepared to be placed over the left cap, and you keep the teeth in the handles of the woman, or in the collar, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or further in the beard, or in the shoulder of the woman, or in the loci propdas of the costas, or dear the ypocondres.
If the treatment is on the feet of the patient, then apply it in the puncture or on the side of the ribs.
And keep the anus tight and stop the curvature of the intestine in that part which is between the left and right sides of the uterus, and insert the anus easily and leave it in place for as far as possible, and if it reaches the cause of the pain.
And place and keep the other anus in the appropriate position of the patient, or the third if necessary, so that it is not extended too far, and does not extend beyond its rectum, only.
Make sure that the entire operation is done correctly, so that the excretion of the patient is eliminated as it is in the eradication of the disease.
And pay attention to that which is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of the patient is held, then pay attention to the matron who teaches you the details of it and inserts it expertly and revolves it around the part that is held.
If the part of the foot is forgotten, then make incisions on them and push them inside the location from which they were taken; and do this if the entire foot is forgotten.
If the wound is located under another part of the body and cannot be reduced by cauterization, then cover that area with a cloth; and take it out when all of it is outside, and insert it in the joint of the wound or on the thigh.
And cover that area with cloth on the other wound and on both feet.
If the head of the foot is large, or it occurs in the cauterization process during the incision, or if the mouth of the wound is adjusted at the top, then cover that area with cloth between the spines and cut the head and remove the water, or if that does not happen with an instrument called "alundat," which is shaped like the others in the capital, which is this.
And if the foot is large by nature: and cover that area with cloth, or take that area with the "alundat" instrument as they have said; and take out the bones with the forceps.
If the head is injured and becomes swollen, then the clavicle should be fractured, and you must insert it into the wound, making sure that the humidity present in the chest is drained out.
If it is not complicated, and there are no obstacles to opening the head, then you should insert your hand as soon as possible.
If the abdomen is swollen or there is fluid in it, then you should cover that opening with your hand to prevent the humidity present inside from escaping.
If the wound is on the thighs, then you should clean it and direct it towards the mouth of the patient for easier cleaning.
If the chest is swollen and hard, then you should cover that opening with your hand to prevent it from collapsing under the weight of the patient's body, and drain the fluid that runs out into the wound.
If the other limbs are not injured and the head is open, then you should insert your hand into the patient's left side; if the mouth of the patient is closed, then introduce your hand into the left nostril, and draw out that part through the mouth of the patient, and enter it with one or two fingers, and push it out with those fingers.
If the mouth of the child is bitten by a flea due to which it happens to the child, then you cover the mouth with a piece of cloth so that it does not get wet; then apply a few drops of ointment made from warm oily substances. And apply plasters; and follow the patient in warming and moistening agents.
If the plaster is on the side of the foot, it is possible to apply a drop of ointment: and it should be applied as they have said in the patient's stool.
If it is not possible to apply a drop of ointment, then apply it in the umbilicus, and extract it.
And make sure that no other cause is causing dinting of the second finger.
And when you have completed your operation, apply the remedies that have been said for the treatment of fleas that occur in the child's mouth.
If diarrhea occurs, then warm oily substances and apply the other remedies.
And you have seen a woman in the belly of whom there was a child that had died, and placed over that focus another one that was brought to life, and the dead child was replaced by the other. It happens at some point in life that a swelling appears on the face; and it begins to inflate as soon as the skin is scratched, and then it starts to bruise.
And you were called for the cure of it, and treated it for a long time, and the swelling did not become solidified.
Then you examined it from some causes of strong attraction, and observed the bone, and passed your hand along the joints, and observed another bone; and you were too astonished to see if there was a bone in the belly.
And then you thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Then you examined the swelling, and extracted the bones from it, the female present in the face holes, and had been seen in that way for a long time, corrected by a small piece of bandage.
And you did not think it strange, but rather that this is known and helpful for the doctor who uses an artificial bone to treat the patient's ailment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout
This is the form of a hernia in which the intestine is pushed out, which has two openings at the extremities of two holes. However, this hernia may be covered with a thin layer of tissue, and it can be made of fat or bone.
And the latitude of each fist is two dice, and the margin of each is one die, and the longitude of each is a palm and a digit; and in the middle location of two fists, there are two adjustments of those feet, of which the longitude is as long as a palm and a little more, and the latitude is two dice or a little more.
And these two additions are placed inside the mouth of the wound so that it can be opened when you roll over the prescribed virtues.
Another form of this hernia may be covered with a thin layer and a thicker layer:
When the joint pain is caused by hardness of the bones or cartilage, it is called a "fist" (or "fistula") when it resembles the forceps used to grasp and manipulate objects. However, at the ends of the fistula, there are sometimes additional parts that are curved like a palm, and the angle between them is two degrees.
And when you want to open it more, you should place the female over the bed with the feet hanging down, opening as much as possible between the thighs of the patient. Then open the hole with the instrument as much as possible according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the fistula that fits inside the metron.
The shape of the fistula described by ancients:
The way to push it out is by empelling it with the foot.
The way to measure it is by counting the large head.
And it is similar to forceps at the end, sometimes with curved teeth, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes with teeth like those of a saw that is inserted and counted. Forma de amesidat pauc: This line seems to be a medical term or phrase,
Forma de unci havent una spina: This line can be translated as "A form of the spine without
Forma de unci havent doas spinas: This line can be translated as "A form of the spine with two
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit: This line can be translated as "A form of the spine with two ends, where the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz: This line can be translated as "A form of two sp
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, and when you have multiplied the specifics of that and they are prepared by the artificer, as it is placed in its operation and as it is placed for the men according to their quantity.
When it comes to those instruments, you must already have them prepared, as the need for them cannot be excused.
This sentence seems to be in a medieval medical context, possibly referring to the removal of a second-
When the second child is held, you must command the mother to hold the infant's head, and then gently pull back the skin around the mouth and nose of the infant, and if necessary, cut it.
And if you need to, take a knife and pierce through the cover of the pot and place it on the surface where the mouth of the jar is, like this, as well as a piece of cloth, a rag, an earthenware cup, an aromatic cinnamon stick, and a sacred cassia lignea and saintjohn's wort. All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the knife, and place it on the fire.
And place a cotton swab in the mouth of the jar, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concave part of the jar.
And make that swab smoke as they have said, and the next time it will be forgotten at the speed of the wind.
If this cure does not work and you do not want to use it, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil or ointment of sage, and enter that in the conh and wants to see if the second time is found, then take that and extend it little by little until it is annexed in the mouth of the jar, and when you find the second one, extract that small piece by piece according to what the midwife has recommended, and do not force the jar to close. When the joint is not moved in the right and left directions, it becomes difficult.
If the mouth of the child is crooked, we have already recommended the cure for the stunted growth and the medical treatment of the shape of the head.
If not all causes are remembered, it is important to keep in mind that what is said about the mouth of the child lies in the thigh of the woman, and if it is crushed and becomes a terafarmacon; then it will become infected after a few days and will be eliminated and forgotten.
If it is infected, it is from the elevated mouth of the head and stomach, and that leaks the poison; and then it is important to be administered under fumigations and appropriate for that.
More than the ancients, it is now treated with fumigations of nitre and dried figs.
Form of the instrument by which the woman is under fumigation, you must have the retention of menstruation and the second day.
It may be visible or hidden.
If the end is gently placed at the hearth and the wide end is placed over the fire, then the smoke should be placed over the hearth's bricks.
Hold onto that entrance until that smoke is consumed and then do another one.
For the cure of a child's non-perforated buttock.
If the children are not yet born and the buttocks of the child are not perforated, which are already soft and tender. Then cover the midwife who perforates at the said cipher; and if not, perforate it with a sharp one, and keep in mind that it does not touch the snake.
And place your hand over that soft wool in vine and oil; and cure that with anointing it within so that it is clean.
If you fear that it is tender, place your hand over the wound for a few days, and take it out when the child wants to defecate.
And if the tenderness of the buttock has been consolidated due to plague or cholera; then make sure that this consolidation is firm, and use the cure that we have said about the cure and the poultice.
When treating fistulas that are discharging from the body, it is necessary to cleanse them thoroughly and apply an appropriate ointment or dress
The fistulas that are discharging from the body are characterized by low-quality mucus and large amounts of pus, which can either come directly from the anus or from the space between the parts.
And it is either a fistula or motes.
And if that mucus is old and comes from the white, moist, or subtle humidity, some penetrating worms may be found in those fistulas.
And those worms are known to be caused by the cold that exits and the ventilation; and some use the thigh for the exit, and it is more likely to expel those worms.
And some worms are found in the space penetrating into the vesica, and entering the meat of the thigh; and some worms enter the joint of the thigh and enter the notch of the ankle.
And what is known about the penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is that you have placed the thin end in the buttocks, and entered it with a subtle tool of iron or steel to treat the fistula when there is no turbulence.
When you feel a certain tightness, then enter with your fingers or hooves into that subtle spot or hair of the thigh that you feel in the inner part of the thigh.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor proceed with any cause of colic, wind, or ventosity, as they have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and you should take care of the patient.
And when the fistula penetrates into the vesica or into the meat of the thigh, you know that it is the sign of urine from that place and the prohibition of that in order for that location to be solidified in medicine.
And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and covering of pain in the circuit, you know that the tightness has entered here if there is no tightness in the bone and pain in the circuit of the part; and that there is an opening at all times; and that it does not belong to this medication, nor is it solidified in enguent.
When all those fistulas are not cured at once, and the cure of those depends on the skill of the doctors who treat them, it is necessary to rely on their expertise.
In cases where the fistula is not penetrating and not old, it is hoped that a simple salve will be sufficient for you to recommend, and that you have already tried it.
And is that the thigh of the patient is between your hands on the shoulder and raises the changes of you within, the knees are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and approaching try to push or if it is in the fistula tightness, approaching that you know the location where the attempt is made.
And if the thigh of the patient is around the anus, you know that you should enter the tip of your finger into the anus.
And if you feel in the tip of your finger that the attempt has already been made to pierce, or another that you feel between the tip and the fistula or the siphon, you know for sure that it is penetrating; and then you do not need to work on that, as it is not in the cure, as they have said.
The first line of the text translates to: "However, it is said that a healthy man in his prime should...
When performing the medication for which it is hoped to help him, it is believed that you gently heat the cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert it into the fistula after it has passed around the wound; and repeat this or three times after you know that all those adjusted and open fistulas that seem like a quill of feathers from the end of the pen are already squeezed.
And care for that which is wrapped in a cavity within which it can pass through all those wounds that are closed, and care for that which is medicating the flesh and consolidating it, and if it is healed, then so be it; and if not, do not heal in another time for another cure.
And if it enters and does not pass through that which is said to be in the anus, and between that and the testicle that is most made of flesh or fat, and sometimes the fistula in such a way that the surface of the abdomen is exposed, you dry the abdomen from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the testicle is also dried, and it remains in the fistula until the dryness reaches the location where the end of the testicle reaches, and the testicle is released and catches.
When you clean those fistulous wounds that are assembled like a canula of a needle and not caused by any cause,
If there is flow of blood several times that comes between you and your operation when you are cutting those flesh, then use the one that is most suitable for cauterization with fire or medical acute instruments, for cauterization with fire adjusts good habits: it is the adjustment of those flesh cuts, and the removal of the smell of excessive humidity.
And if you have to treat those that are wrapped in border or have come through that place, and then treat the plague with hard durable bones that will engender and consolidate.
And in those medicines where they are sterilized and excessive; when restored it is already healed and you do not fear re-treatment.
If the fistula has already gone through the anus of the buttock and is extended from its surface, then enter the water that is in the anus of the buttock and investigate what is there.
And if hundreds of attempts have been made and you enter it with a finger or bone, and it leads to penetration, then do not operate on it but second the faith and hope.
The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either by cauterizing that area as they have said; or by cutting into that entrance which you can achieve the conviction of the body through which you may enter the adjacent tissues and perform the necessary cure; and do not process for so that you do not incise the ligament containing the thigh, and that happened over the wound of the castration desire; and apply that am to what they have said that fort the body is cured; or by extending that bandage and covering that pus which you cut in that entrance as they have said, or attempt or another instrument of sharp extremity, and cover those fistulas which are in the cutting through the part where you can perforate; and apply effort to make the restoration of the whole plague by cutting, and if the pus does not consolidate, and rampage the umbilical fistula in the part of the thigh, and it will be a larger for the castration. And in every case, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you enter the instrument into the fistula, and around the surface of the body at the level of the thigh and in the margin of the thigh, you hold the instrument with a perforated extremity, which is like a drill for preparing the wound according to this form:
When entering the affected area, enter through one of the five openings or around those; and then enter as much as possible into the fistula that allows you to reach the cavity of the body.
If it penetrates into the margin of the buttock, you should remove that piece of intestine that you inserted in the anus; and then remove the end of the intestine and adjust the two ends according to each other, and sew them, and leave them for a day or two, and when the end of the intestine is inside the flesh, sew it at the point where those parts of the intestine are inserted that are between the two ends of the intestine and that cause pain.
And when the plague is cured, if it has been consolidated and healed.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any manner that you are prepared for, except that it should be in the pre-on, where it is not for you to do this because it has not been penetrated; and then make amends for that once it is healed.
The form of the spur of the thorn that is used to treat the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, because it does not enter as much as necessary, so that it is not harmful, you can do it as many times as needed.
When stitching up hemorrhages that run through the incision of those.
When the second pair of nails is removed, it seems as if they are made of charcoal, or perhaps they are similar to those made of fat. And of those small and large ones, and that the sauce correlates with those times and is one, and the movements, and the outside of the buttocks, and at the ends of it.
However, those that are on the buttocks are different from those in the months of little humidity, of which the sauce is aquamarine or a small amount of sanctifying oil, and is followed by the color of the skin.
And the cure of that which is giving the buttocks is that you command the thighs to relax and express themselves within which the buttocks become relaxed and the nails appear to you. Then you close and suspend the nails or those that you have in your own hands, and pay attention to those with their own razors.
If the nails are not held by humidity or softness of the nails, then pull them with rough or sharp or laced with hair, and extract them from the wounds, and place them in the wounds some powders that are scattered at the cauterization point; or cauterize them after having been preceded by cauterization at the top of cauterization. And then cares for those who are healed when they are well.
And if the anus does not obey excretion, then cut it and make it like that of gout, and wash it with that water that is in the bowl and that obeys excretion more gently when the anus is relaxed.
If the menstrual flow is deformed, its cause is lighter, and it is that you grasp those with your own hand or with your thumb, or with those, and then care for them, and wash them with that water that has been said when they are healed.
And if you have inscised them, know that you must make a suture of them later with this hand: take a good needle and enter it into the hole and extract the menstrual flow from the parts above, and make it penetrate into the hole of the other part, and wrap the extracted parts of the needle in the part behind the hole, and stretch them longitudinally; and stitch the menstrual flow to the strong structure, and make sure to not leave the needle inside.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. When it is healed, cure those parts that were injured or incurably diseased within that part which is now healthy.
And when they are old and not valuable in that medicine, you know that those parts are affected by the point of the puncture or by the tunica within which the wet humors are situated and are hostile to those secreting pus, which prohibits their consolidation; and then cure them when they are consolidated.
You must keep those parts in mind that are raging with pus, which is entering and drying them out; and then cure them when they are healed.
This sentence is in Latin and can be translated to English as: "You know that aloe vera is closed, and it is not if not seen red on the color of the body like a clavicle, and it is found in all the body and mainly in the feet and toes, and therefore for that pain you must have the anatomy.
When it is necessary to close this that is in the circuit of the lock, and to hold it with the pliers or with one's hand, and to remove it from its place; and take care of that.
If you wish, make a point on the following part in the capital.
Small warts are an elevated, rough, circular opening on the surface of the skin, and more visible in children.
To treat it, spread or insert it there, or cut it with what is clean or with the inside that contains it. If you wish, make a point according to what has been said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
Small mites are an elevated, rough, or gross opening on the surface of the skin that continues in the preon, and when the frog attacks it appears to bite like a termite, and is made around the skin.
To treat it, grasp a needle of wood or of bone, and hold it firmly, and place it over the spider inside which it contains the circle of the canula; and take care to revolve your hand over that which is inserted there and in the circuit of the spider, and place it on the flesh of the preon, and remove the spider from its nest.
If you wish, make a canula of iron or steel according to this form:
When the part of the canula is touching subtlety, quietly (not pierced), wrapped around it that over the same thing the learning of the body is uncovered and the revolution of that.
If you wish to cauterize the ant after it has been cut, as is said in the cauterization of the thigh at the tip of the cauterization instrument.
In the manner that I administer the instruments to give cristers.
Some cristers are made of silver or lead, or are melted or ground; and some cristers are made from those small instruments, which are then made larger according to the ones that are administered in the treatment of small children's wounds, and if the ends are rough or ragged, the cristers made from those are small.
The form of large and small cristers:
The top of the cannula of the patient is where the bag is fastened, and in this manner, it is fastened differently each time.
And the end of the plug that has been left, which is inserted into the belly, is narrow (not cut) by the knife, at most subtle; and on one side of the latex there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the size of the rays and a small one is inserted.
If the pouch in which the animal's bladder or lamb's wool is placed, and the handle of the tool is a palm.
When a wound is made through the flesh as it turns; and if the space within the wound is the largest part of the said.
And if you enter into those wounds as far as they are deep and wide, or encircle them; and adjust a bag; and when you have placed it in that bag, be careful to fasten it at the head of the crystals between two distinct parts of great strength, and cristate each of those thorns: The quality of cristaling each of these is what you fill the bag with, which is scaled according to the tolerance of the wound; and remember that it should not be too long nor too thin.
And if the wound is placed on the side of the body, and raises its limbs up and holds a pillow under them, and unties the cauterization from the olive oil or albumen of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and enters that into the buttocks for ease, and the minister takes the bag and expresses more and as it is emptied in the bowel that is in the crystals, and removes the crystals and the wound takes its limbs to the side.
If the medicine forces it to become inflamed, hold it as much as possible; and if you doze off for a whole night, it will be less damaged in the long run.
If you christen that in the cures of diarrhea of the stomach and the inflammation of the thigh, then you will repeat the cauterization when it is healthy.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or fissures, then you should be the christian most subtle and leon-like among them, of those whose criteria the children will follow.
In the cure of the plagues.
And you have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was suitable for the free, and you say so that the cure of those who are more and medical is according to the complement.
Therefore, say that the plagues are divided according to what they are pains and according to the location where they are found.
And the causes by which you see that the plagues are pains are such as gout, or incision of the skin or of the chest, or percussion, or thrusting, or cutting, or semblance to those of the causes.
The following line by line translation of the given medieval medical treatise is as follows:
When you are recommending the cure for some diseases, based on that reasoning and rule for other diseases.
And you begin with the simple headaches, where the reminder of the compounds comes at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, when you encounter a simple headache in the head that is not fractured, you should consider: if it is due to stones or a mimic, and the joint has already trinqued, and it is only a great pain and there are concerns about the malady of apostema caut, then you should touch the head as much as possible, and do not delay; and extract from the side of the sanc as soon as possible, according to the quantity of the virtue of that one if no other cause prohibits fleubotomy, mainly if it is the one that has given out of the disease it is few.
And if it is the opposite fleubotomy of the diseased part; and keep the malady of repletion and of vomiting and of large gastric worms.
If there is any prohibition of the minimum, then you should be less eating and not approach flesh or blood.
When you stop over the wound, if there is an attack of apoplexy, let cotton soaked in rose oil or vinegar be applied to it.
If you are sure of apoplexy, stop over the wound, if it is recent and the air has not changed, use that powder that I recommend in small amounts.
If the air has already changed, stop over the wound after it is clean.
If the wound is large or has an incision and does not have well-fitting lips, adjust those sutures according to the sutures I recommend.
If the wound has already been discovered by the bone and penis, and there is no tightening of the thighs except for a small suspensory, you should open that wound and treat it with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the thigh to be cut into sections according to those veins where the meat grows: caps and form like them, within which there is flesh.
If the joint becomes degenerate and does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all around it and remove it, and then treat it.
If in these plagues an artery or vein of the kind that carries blood from the intestine can occur, and it is not cut off by doctors, then you should investigate the artery, and if it is not cut, you should cut it at that point; and if this causes pain to you, then you should cauterize within that point when it is cut.
And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is legitimate; it is not certain that you should powder over those powders, but rather that they become solidified at those points where the air changes them.
And the recipe for the powder is as follows: a mixture of olive oil taken from one part, of dragon's blood taken from three parts, and all thoroughly cut and ground, and over that the plague is filled, and it is held together by good constriction, and it is coagulated on the surface of that, and it is bound to the vein.
And then apply poultice to that part with powder and wrap it around, and do not let it slide while the patient is lying down, so that the medicine does not come into contact with the wound.
And if any of you have alone cauterized, when you are not in my presence and I am not there to sanctify with dragon's blood.
And this operation is already performed on the largest plagues when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them straight, and recent plagues of the same kind, where the air has not been altered.
And if the air has altered it, and especially during summer, you will not see the position of this powder, nor cure those who have said that you place it over those engorged parts or over those pores of the flour of the other water and honey after it is prepared; and this cures those in another cure after they are healed.
And if you happen to have a fractured bone in the leg and it is small, then you should remove that part with this method.
When you tell the care of the fractures of the head due to gout.
When plagues of the colon are present, it is necessary to apply remedies that can
If the plague occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the colon are already involved or the artery, then the nerves are affected only that it is necessary to avoid surgery because of the severe stitching that causes, as zinc and sage that are used to sew those that do not have nerves and contract like them. And do not pause on the cause of all flow, because the substance of the nerves is fluid and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is pulled from all parts of the body.
And if this is treated with improper medicines, then see how the water is caused, some infused in olive or not olive, and thick when it is washed with water and the other parts are minded according to this manner, and it is found to be humid.
If the plague is large, then administer suture or cut the lips of it, and afterwards treat that when it is cured.
When the plague is deep or occurs in the lower part of the incision, then one should perforate that in the location that is less painful.
When the plague has already cut an artery and there is a flow of blood, then one should separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if it is necessary to provoke such.
When the plague has already cut the vertebrae of the spine or the entire thing, and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then one should adjust the edges of the coat over the collarbone of the plague and not touch that; then equalize that and reduce it over its natural figure, and stretch it decently, and leave it there for a while; and take care of that in those places where it is stitched and excited, so that it remains healthy.
When the plague has already cut into the bones, then one should perforate that, and if in it there are fragments of them, extract all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it inside when the plague is healed, and separate it and the eggshell of it is alleviated.
If the plague is recent, you should powder that powder that I have recommended to you. If in the plague there is an abscess, you should treat that with the remedy that I have recommended to you, which will come back to the capital part.
If it is a percussion of the spine or cotyle, and sometimes of the depth, you should consider if the plague has ventilation when the thigh is clean; you know that the plague is fatal.
And if in it there is no depth and the plague is recent to the main part of the hour, you should pause in it with the first powder, and do not strain that because it is not the sanctuary retained in the depth of it and that returns to the core and that does not affect the thigh, but pause in it attracted, and leave it to the visible days of the day.
And if the engagement is not at your present, you should pause in the orifice of the plague with enough powder because it comes out that water which you have; and make the thigh sleep over the plague so that it runs that water which is in it adjusted.
If the plague has passed three days or more and no spasm or tremor of the heart or stricture of the gut occurs, and sometimes other good positions for the patient, you know that the plague is safe; and then care for that one with pains and the other cure when it is healed.
If the cure of the patient is excused and it has been done many times, you know that a fistula has been made; then care for that one with the capital head.
If the plague is due to compression of spasm or of the chest, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or of the back, you know that this one should be cared for before suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If the plague has already made an impression on the bones and you know that the patient has been compressed with presses, you should tighten the plague and extract those presses if they are separated. If they are not separated, you should loosen the presses that are caked with the plague, as the extraction of them is difficult.
When other diseases occur in other parts of the body, the treatment for this is the treatment that has been called gout.
Of stomach diseases.
The disposition that occurs in the stomach is either large, small, or intermittent.
And a small dislocation is difficult to be done by another hand, and if it is found that the reduction of them is difficult, then do not hesitate to introduce them into their place as much as possible, because they are easily engorged and the insertion of the thread is difficult.
And the better dislocation is intermittent, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the special cases mentioned earlier.
You know that the suture of the stomach is second to four hands, and fewer sutures are common that are suitable for sutures of other diseases of the body.
When two other sutures are used to communicate with other plagues, but not in the abdominal suture itself.
And I recommend to you every examination and declaration.
When the disease is small and occurs due to a cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then you are in one of two hands: either because of the small tear caused as they have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And when it is swollen, you know that you should cut this in such a way that you submerge it with a wet sponge from the body alone, or that you soaked it in water, and cyperus, and spike, and embrocation, and apply it to the intestine when the inflammation is resolved.
And some people have seen that this is better when the water alone is used for resolution of inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation being resolved, you hydrate the intestine with water in which it was cooked with herbs such as galingale, malva, and marshmallow, so that the intestine is alleviated from its cause.
If the intestine of the patient is not obstructed in this treatment, then you should cut the disruption with a small sharp instrument that has not been used before.
The first source sentence translates to: "The first dressing is better when it is not too tight and does not cause discomfort, and is not an occupation for picking or removing necessary items.
1. "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
2. "it occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When the plague is amplified and comes out of the belly, you should know that its reduction should follow the shape of the natural body in its proper place, if possible over there, so it is better.
When the disruption is wide and occurs in the lower part of the abdomen, you should cover the patient's chest with the blanket and lay them down on their side, keeping their hands close to their face; and if it occurs in the lower part of the stomach, you should hold the patient's head and place their feet on the blanket.
If the disruption is in one of the two parts of the stomach, you should pause your attention and consideration until you know for sure which part is affected so that the other part is not affected as well.
And it is necessary to administer this remedy in both large and small pains.
In small pains, pause what you have prepared and make sure that the minister is between your most important parts, holding the disruption in place with all his strength and adjusting the lips of the patient, and then descend from there to where it was and cause another one if necessary.
This is the common suture method: one that you grasp with your thumb, according to the size of the pain; and let it out at the end of the disruption of that ring, and pull the thumb tightly, or else you will not keep the ends of the chain in the correct position, at the ends of the colon that you leave the chain on the parts of the belt, before you pierce that part; and you have already added the ends of the chain and the ends of the colon, and then make four orders.
When the double string is tightened around the pulley, and some of the ropes are cut into parts, and then the lips of the holes are added for addition's sake; and then the size of that is laid off on another pulley, and it is fixed in place as if it were the first one, and you do not stop doing this until all the contraction of the plague is completed.
And the holes are more precise between coarse and subtlety, four of the subtle holes slightly penetrate the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to fit into the codpiece, and therefore it is necessary that they be both precise and large.
And it is not necessary that the hole be placed at the extremities of the codpiece, because if the flesh is not slightly penetrated and the plague is exposed in front of its consolidation.
And the stitches are not prolonged so that the plague is not prevented from consolidating.
And slightly insert the ends of the holes so that they do not cause the patient's thigh to ache; and place your hand over the expanded stitches of all parts, which hold the ends of the holes; and remove them as soon as you know that the plague has been consolidated.
This is the translation of the first line:
The second source sentence translates to: "Then make the second suture: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, from the spine and both ends of the cyst, in one direction, with a needle in which there is a fine thread that unravels in subtlety and size.
When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that metal part from which it began, so that the true cage catches the subcutaneous part that was previously opened, so that the suture is the next suture of drap am the quality of that which strengthens the draps so.
And pause between each stitch the amount of the large of that certain metal.
And this stitch boasts men.
And this stitch cures the plague that was infected in a man in the right abdomen, which was infected by a cat, and was the rupture of the plague of a palm, and was herniated from the two palms of the intestine of the member, and was the disruption in the intestine of the member; and then you reduce that which the bowel had suffered the plague for 24 hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and was cured that which was sick, and was healed; and after that it becomes quiet for many years, and is discussed in its own positions.
When the other doctors had failed to heal them; and by miracle, for that one I could not cure, who was in a place where there was no atrophy nor any medicine, only pause over the plague cot which had two veins on that day and frequent urination, as soon as the focus was healthy.
May I tell you two types of suture from another story in Parola?
And is that you understand about suturing the umbilicus, and entering the hole from the edge of the wound to the end of the dent?
And how the needle penetrates into the umbilicus and through the cartilage, and along the entire length, and leave the end of the navel where you entered the needle; and then let the other end of the needle go through from the edge of the wound to the other end of the dent.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another one at the other end of the wound in the dent of the edge; and leave the exit of the navel that is in this lap, and let the needle go through the hole from the other end of the dent to the edge.
When the penis is inserted into that which it is meant to penetrate, and that which it is meant to penetrate is at the end of the vagina that is in the part of the body where it should be, then it has fully penetrated.
Then, starting from this side and going to the other end of the vagina, extract the needle from the intestine that was inserted, and then return it to its original position in the intestine; extract the part of the intestine that was extracted from this side.
Then make another hole and another, and make another hole inside of which you cut everything that is deformed according to that example.
The sum of this suturing is that you cut the epithelium that cuts the hair, in other words, that you cut the vagina with a hole in the end of the intestine, and that you see the other hole inside of which the clitoris is completely filled.
The second type of suturing is that which Gualia describes, and this is for the purpose of the patient and according to the doctor's advice, that you cut the other half of the vagina that the doctors cut in another part, in other words, that you add all parts to their natural part, and they apply the end of one side and the end of the penis to the other side, and that is what you should follow according to my advice.
When you have placed the needle at the tip of your thumb, in the same direction as the incision you made on your own part, and let it pierce into the denticle in that spot, and see two ends of the cipher; and then rotate the needle and make it pierce from the fornacle to the denticle at both ends of the cipher.
When you turn those parts, and let each of the parts that are being penetrated enter the opposite part in two extremities of the mirror, which are not in the same direction as the Latin.
This suture is better than the common suture, and it is the suture that precedes the reminder.
This is the sermon of Guillermo.
If it may be that the doctor has not explained this to you, the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you enter through these in each one with a needle, and then start with the intromission of the needle that you must use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those that cause the engagement of the hands.
You know that when there is a disruption in the lower part of the abdomen, it is difficult to perform the suture of the intestine compared to other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of medical treatment for the plague is judged by the other plagues.
That which causes it to be recent when you can obtain the plague in the presence of the sacred sand that the air alters there, and reduces the intestines and colons of that kind and makes them suitable for that decently, then stop on that earth-like powder.
If the air has already altered the plague, then stop over the area that appears which cause hard stones and close the fissures, and they become solid and visible; and care for that plague as if it were the cure of other plagues when it is healed.
If you do not have the presence of medicines, stop over that area, and when it begins to get wet, cut a piece of cloth, a coat, and change those two veins each day, as you have done and shown, when the plagues are simple. And you will not need another medicine in timely dispositions when the plagues are simple.
If you fear that the plague communicates injury to the main members, then cover that with wool dipped in tempered olive oil or rose oil, and place it in the circuit of the loci which are between the ankles and behind the knees.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, then every day observe that, and if the stitch becomes black and the purulent exudate comes out through the intestine and enters the cavity of the confluence, then...
You know that the one who is about to give birth is in need of more medicine than the one who is giving birth to a small child.
It is difficult medication for the intestine which is called "gout" to not receive any plague that comes into it; and this is because of the great number of veins that are in it, and because of its size, and because of its subtlety of shape, and because of its proximity to the natural nerves.
If this is the case that you are proceeding with the plague, and you achieve the desired result, then return to your own method which reduces the intestine's constriction.
If it has passed some time and you have already done well or not, then know that what you stretch over the place that is being disfigured by the intestine, for which the blood comes out of the veins and arteries in the skin, is because of the plague.
And you have to insert that there is another limb, and stop the extremities of the thread until the end of the plague's exit, so that over you is alleviated the attraction of the plague because of the closeness of the skin and the emission of the plague's brace.
This is a memory of the diseases that happened in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because it has been seen that the one who had the disease in the stomach was percussed by a staff and was the plague of the part of the stomach, and the plague was an old one and made a fistula, and it was also a sign of the management and vitality.
Then, if you have already cured the disease, it does not matter if it was not cured in the hospital, and I stopped with the details of that which has been made hot and the place is consolidated.
And if you say that I have seen the place already consolidated, then cover the thigh with a cloth over the accident of mal in the stomach; and do not encounter any lack of mal accident and rumors in the mouth of its disposed holes eating and drinking, and then enter bath and exercise in your speech.
And it has been told to experienced patients that when the disease occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be liated according to this method: and it is that you take large pills; and then adjust the lips of the plague and stop one pill of those that are over the lips of the plague; then when you take them over and stretch your mouth, the cap of the pill adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another type of fly for the first time, and do not stop until you have made as many flies as the total number of the plague.
Then reduce that and see how the plague is; and look at those attached to the intestine when the intestine is healed, and do not harm the thighs.
And it may be that the intestine is visible with a thin thread which is made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, because it is more in the needle; and it is that you hold the end of this intestine, and it is a waste, and reduce the end of that intestine thread, envelops, and enters that thread into needles and into that intestine, and reduces it in disruption.
And this type of stitching with flies is not the only way of confidence and hope.
If the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thighs, then do not cut too much, and do not heal completely, and do not harm the thighs.
When treating a wound or fistula, it is important to follow proper hygiene practices to prevent infection and promote he
When a wound or abscess becomes infected and does not heal quickly, and does not rupture completely at any time, it is commonly called a fistula and is referred to as such in any part of the body.
And a fistula is often characterized by being firm, white, and painless, and it does not change in shape like the pain of a wound; and for that reason, that part is called an alvus, which is the cause of the pain.
And in a fistula, the part that gets sore is wet; and soon the wetness is absorbed in some hours. And some of this moisture is thick, and it is scant, and it is rough.
When all causes have been shown, and the symptoms of those causes are treated by the physicians in their division.
And I ask you to tell me what treatment is given for fistula, which is made through surgery by the physicians in their division.
I know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body, and four of those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the celiac, or the bowels, or the vesica, or to any part of the costal cartilages, or to any part of the spinal columns, or to any part of the joints composed of cartilage from the knee and foot; and those that cause proximity to the main member and similarity.
And for those of these fistulas that follow this method are those of difficult cure, and do not receive treatment, and the physicians occupy themselves with it and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that I have said, and you expect and trust in the cure of it, and you want to know its nature, then try to close it with iron or copper, and if the fistula follows correctly, and ask about it.
If the fistula is twisted, investigate that which is gently pressed under that subtle plum, for four plums are needed for the levitation of the heart's course and to curve the twisting.
And if the fistula has not had horrible symptoms, it is not possible for you to understand about the am torta.
Then, Christians the wound with your wounds, for the humidity by which you cleans the one wound is needed by the others to cleanse and heal them.
And if you inquire very carefully, which hand it is possible for you to know if you have bones or nerves, and whether the cavity of the long or short fistula is open, or if it is a fistula that has caused your wound and is above all the strength of your body, the strength of your entrails, which enterinthe abdomen, and the victory over pain depends on the compression of the hand over the place, and the understanding and the causes of the accidents in the apothem.
And when you have been on all those causes, you will see the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula or if it is in its place, long from joint, or from nerves, or from arteries, or from veins, or from one of the parts which you say you have and tell.
When you wet the fistula after it is said to be due to the narcotic of the patient, and take care that it does not pass through that filtration and through decayed cartilage, and that it is not born in the birth canal or from the thigh or semblances, and cure that part which is healed.
If the fistula is of long depth and is following the rectum, then you should cover it as much as possible with your own body until you can do so as much as possible, and modify all of your corrupt cartilage; and administer wrapped cold medications in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the conviction of the fistula that you have understood with iron.
And use some of the sharp medicines that the cold medicine corrupts all that is inside which is in the conviction of the fistula of corruption.
And restore those that cause the production of healthy cartilage within which is healed.
If it is not cured by this, then you should cauterize that according to what has been recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify that, you should inquire about it and dry the area that has been recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as they have said.
If the bones are discovered and found to be blackened with corruption, then you should immediately treat that part where the corruption is located; and afterwards, care for that area as follows:
If the bone does not heal and becomes stiff as before, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you should examine it again and carefully make the reason for it known, and restore it with the same fortifying tie.
And if it heals, well and good; but if not, you should know that the corruption is deep in the long distance of the body, which has not been able to be treated, and then there is no help for it except to lay down that one.
And if the bones are only slightly corrupted, or if it is possible to remove that part, then you should know that you should remove it with fine forceps as follows:
And if those bones are the only ones that are affected, then you should carefully make the extraction of all of them, and there will be no cause for concern about your strength.
If you have any opposition to any cause of cold humors, and if there is no fear or mistake in their insertion, then insert those limbs or bones where they are, and smooth the bones.
If you are not prepared to sharpen the bones of your time, then place your hand over the blood that is flowing from it, and leave it inside that which is within the environment of those bones of limbs and limbs, and keep the blood that is not yet consolidated, and strengthen the cut that you have made in your operation.
If you fear it, place your hand over the submerged cotton in olive oil, or the submerged cotton in Egyptian anguish, or on the neck of those who are separated from the ablation, and when the limbs are separated, and the bones are separated from the ablation, and the attraction is alleviated.
If you have a great bone that is like the bone of a camba or a thigh or an appendage, and that part of it is corrupted by the face of it, then you should reduce that am resistance only by entering that which is left inside that neck and corruption, and proportionately restore the blood.
When the body of a person is corrupted to a great extent, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely within the location where the corruption has pervaded, and then care for that within which it has become solid.
I advise you to attend to a man in his bedroom so that you can pause there and assist me with my operation.
A young man of approximately xxx years old had an injury in his thigh, and there were many bad parts on the material of the leg that was permeated by the material of the thigh, and it was a large gangrene, and I did not consider this as an external cause.
And then I extended the time for that due to the error of the doctors who had made it, and the materials were corrupted, and the cure was paused when the cushion was made, and some are placed in those parts which all get perforation and the moisture of the body.
And then the treatment was multitude of doctors around for two years, and they did not know in those times what I knew in the art, when you were called.
When I saw the girdle of the patient and the materials that ran from his wounds through great cavities in his body; and all of this man's body was completely intact and his color was citrine.
And then I inserted the tentacle into one of those wounds and the tentacle reached the bone.
And then I carefully examined all of the wounds and found that they all reached the bone.
And then I touched and placed my hand over one of the wounds that I had entered, and I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotten and corrupt, and it was already corrupted in the girdle that had penetrated into the meat.
And then I considered that this was discovered and prepared by the bone discovered.
And you concluded that it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which had separated and hidden, and you had already fallen.
And then I paused the restoration of the plague by the long-term, non-consolidated medical methods.
And you should rub over the bones afterwards after discovering the first sign, and continue to corrupt the bones.
And I hold that this corruption is from that treatment, and you should do the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you discovered another sign and did not stop inserting the bones one by one particularly, and perforated the restoration of the bone, but it was not restored until I inserted my palm around the marrow, extracted it from the marrow, and restored it with medications, and it became solid and healthy.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of the body except for the disposition of the intestine and the low tolerance of the small intestine and colon, which caused an accident in all hours due to superfluous evacuation of bad sinco.
And it is healthy through whole healing, and there are no hard bones; and the disposition of the body is good in the human form and returns the virtue of the body; and it is conversed about its dispositions and no harm is done in ambulation or in any cause.
If you are sitting on the chest, cover that second manieyra: and it is that you grasp the liament and stretch it at the extremity of that sitting, and command that it be extended in the extension of the liament; and pause the liament with a piece of the first liament; and lay the liament over the flesh that is left of the chest, and extend the extension of it so that the flesh is drawn to the parts left, and you discover the flesh on the location that you wish to suture so that the suture does not draw the flesh.
When you are ready to take the patient's temperature, please ensure that the thermometer is not in contact with the corrupted flesh.
And if the thermometer is placed over the corrupted part little by little, until it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear on its appearance at the touch, and then continue to tighten the other seen one.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then continue to cut a part on the other, and the corruption is at the end of the body or in the part where it was cut; and place your hand away from it, and then take the thermometer of the first part that is the corruption when the squeeze of the other part is continued.
And if the squeeze is on the location of the corruption as small as they have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, insert the other corrupted joint, and tighten the bones that are continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of several joints, you will not be in this reason but to engage.
If corruption is in the nipple of the breast or foot, it is very difficult; but you should inquire into the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and remove it, and adapt it to each subsequent disposition that is possible for you, and make it as right as you can, when it does not oppose your veins or nerves.
You know that the instruments and the way to insert them into these bones vary according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their fineness and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for all kinds of operations the appropriate instrument.
You know that this operation means something to you about the specific of the instrument you indicate; when you have great knowledge and long experience in handling such tools, and testimony of having handled similar cases, where you have learned what is convenient for each tool in the entire disease.
And you should form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use, according to their simplicity and those that you will proceed with in your operation, and the experience that you will have on others. The first line of the text is not in English, but it appears
Forma de serra" translates to "shape of the saw" in English
This line seems to continue describing the shape of the saw, but without more context, it's difficult
to provide a precise translation. However, "ray" in form of the star-shaped lock, and the points of it are like the points of the hinges." This line suggests that the saw has a star-shaped head and its cutting edges resemble those of a hinge.
However, it does not seem to make sense unless the saw is used to cut the joints' heads when they are rotten, or if the mouth is very wide." This line seems to be explaining the purpose of the saw and the conditions under which it should be used.
Forma de razori menor" translates to "shape of the smaller razors
of others." This line seems to be continuing to describe the shape of different types of raz
of another joint pain, it is made with an arc of the length of the push and the sharpness of the iron, and the member of the boy's hand is made to be less severe." This line seems to be describing the process of making a saw for treating joint pain, using an arc (or curve) made from the length of the push and the sharpness of the iron, and making the member (or handle) of the saw smaller for the boy's hand. I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
When it comes to the end of bones and the tightening of joints.
The ends of bones can be affected by intrinsic or extrinsic causes, and if you have medicated for that corruption without relief, sometimes the corruption reaches the member that does not suffer from any cause, and you inscribe that member into this honor to avoid mortality or malice that is greater than the defection of the member.
And the sign of that which happens, is that the member becomes black inside because it is that which is being burned, or it can be placed properly at the blackness inside that enters that member which takes hold of the whole body and that holds everything; and then you inscribe this to that member.
And it seems that the cause of the corruption is the collision of some poisonous causes, such as those of the sting of a scorpion or of a rattlesnake or of a wasp and similar ones.
And if the corruption or the collision is at the end of that, you inscribe it and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter the body.
When it comes to accessing the womb, you should insert your hand into that part of the uterus, and do not leave any space for corruption to enter when you grasp the femoral artery in the arm.
If it is not possible to do that, then insert your hand into the arm within the joint.
If the corruption passes and surrounds the joint, then in that case the death of the patient is certain; and if another cause or treatment is given in sufficient quantity, it will be beneficial for the cure.
When corruption occurs on the foot, as described earlier, you should insert your hand into that part within one of the toes.
If you grasp the sole of the foot, then insert your hand into the entire foot. If possible, enter the denial and insert your hand into the joint of the denial.
If corruption has already spread over the denial, then in that case there is no other choice but to release or dismiss it, and let the patient die.
The tool for inserting the member or clamping it is that you stretch the limb in the area where you want to insert it, and stretch another limb over the location; and extend the minister over the parts, and extend another minister in its; and you separate the flesh that is between two limbs in the same cut as when it is discovered, and apply it or clamp it.
When it comes to covering the patient's body with clothing, make sure that no part is left uncovered and that the dressing adjusts well to the injury and does not cause discomfort.
If you happen to encounter blood from the wound while working, then you should cauterize the affected area or place some powders on it that restrict the wound; and return to your medical practice when it is complete.
And link the affected member to a convenient part, and treat it accordingly when it is healed.
I recommend that you go to a man in the country, this accident that happened to you and to me, which we both recommended, was adjusted to the negro in the country according to the arrangement that was made for combustion of fire.
And this corruption occurred first in the country, when it was decided to take all the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for his wounds, which were very severe, and he rushed to the member with great vehemence because of the pain and the adjustment of the intestine, and he entered into the joint, and the fire was cured.
After some time, that accident happened to you with that corruption in the said member of the left hand.
And then you won, and I was perforated to reflect that superfluity which I placed over the medicine of the hand, according to its mundification; and it does not reflect the superfluity and begins to go to another member that began in the hand.
When I entered the patient's room, and I did not intend to make any observations about the superfluity of that superfluity, and moreover, you must not fear that I will make an incision in the patient's chest, because the virtue of the thigh was over cazement.
I thought that the patient would die, but he returned to his bed and came to me, saying that I had prepared him and made an incision in his chest, and he was cured.
I have related this story only because I am an assistant on this matter, and it is significant for the quality of this disease, and it is meaningful according to which it is meaningful and following which it is done.
Regarding the cure of the sinus and the quality of the clisterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in the flesh of the thigh and the space of the abscess is extended within which it collects filth, and it bursts and perforates and expels the filth, and the place where it was is made as if it were empty, and the cover that is removed from it is like fine thread, and no corruption is found in the bone or nerve or limb, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
When however the space is extended within which corruption presses on some member, it is called an abscess and we do not know.
The cure of the abscess is to make incisions according to that codex, and especially when it becomes more subtle and turns into a thread, and conforms to the place where corruption occurs, without sticking to the location.
If you hope that the codex adheres and that corruption does not occur due to subsequent consequences, and if there are many faces in the codex, then treat that with antiseptic.
And do you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that you use has a good odor, then you antisepticize that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and vinegar and agrees with parts received in parts, and are adjusted in a container, and are placed over the focus within which the medicine is fused and pervades a certain part of the melt.
And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and antisepticize that sinus, and stretch the orifice of it, and place the medicine in it according to the number of hours.
When the pain is removed from that part of the body; and it takes several days to enter when the sinus is softened and the flesh is swollen.
If some wounds are cauterized with coal when you are not present to give this medicine; and it is that you take the coal from the fire, and put over the water; and then close that and cauterize it within that when you confess that this sinus hardens.
If the thigh does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the coal water, close that wound with the coal water and mix honey with it, and close that wound with the honey mixed with water, where four parts of water are added to the melted and washed honey, and the sinu adheres to it, and particularly when it has superfluity of stipitation and dryness.
And when you cauterize some wounds and confess that the sinus is already softened, close that wound with the water that makes it softer in that.
And it is that you take from the gallbladder and dissolve that olive oil or rose oil and see stiptic; or that you clysterize that oil with some medicines and enguents other which have the properties which I have already written about in the book of the enguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is straight in which no canula of the clister is received, then you should amplify that oil little by little, and stop in its covered envelopment with Egyptian enguent or Basilicon enguent when it is amplified.
And seemingly if the orifice is amplified, you should add the lips of the sewn enguent and subtract the quantity in which it comes between the clister's end.
And if the orifice of the del is elevated at the parts of the skin, you should dry that in the basal place where it comes out of it, as when the brace is cut in the preondeza of sinus the flesh will be in the engendred.
And if you cannot dry the sinus within the envelope of the os pus bas according to what you want, then you should perforate that member in its preparation for the which comes out of it according to what is to your taste and not being retained by any cause of the brace.
As many as there are over the orifice of the sinus, which remains tense all day because it is adjusted to the bracelet. And for what reason do you know if that which comes from the bracelet is little or much, or not digested or digested?
And do you also consider the location of that sinus, whether in it there is pain for the patient or not, and if it is in the inflammation?
And when your treatment is prolonged in that manner, and you see the matter that is applied over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or if it is appropriated, how you hold the dressing or change it on the third day, and when you remove the plaster, how you change the cloth for another and renew the application.
If the sinus has a small space under it and does not slip away from it, then do not despair of its adherence, for the physician will be able to appropriate it, for those who have generations of carn in these plagues, and for those who have the opposite of this.
If the sinus has been blocked for several days and is causing indigestion, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then you should adjust the medication in exsiccacio, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry like finalicon when they are adjusted in excess of addition of zegi.
And the more you suffer from the one being treated, it is because you take of finalicon and dissolve in olive oil, and it is over the wound that you have antic engual in its substance, and you comfort that one with it, and use that.
And it seems to have an effect in that one, when there is no blockage, and if finalicon is not found, take of the honey and when you enter that which is engrossed, use that; or if you take marri and aloe and grind them all and sprinkle them over the honey that enters when it is engrossed, and sprinkle them over drap and strengthen that one.
When some women are administered to by an astrologer who is skilled in the art of lily of the valley (and lilies of the valley) and fennel and centaury, and uses those simple or adjusted ones, twists them and crumbles them and sprinkles powder over the meal that I have recommended; and they use it.
If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you know that the corruption is in the bone of the preon, and there is an investigation in the bones or in other hard bones or ligaments; then you should treat it with a curacio fistular, as it is said.
A curacio of panarici and worn-down nails and addition of digit incision and section.
Panarici is applied to the nail that does not leave the upper layer of the skin or foot, and it is less used in other parts, and when it is prolonged and its cure is neglected, or it is applied with apostema caut, or it becomes corrupted, and it enters between the corroded roots of the nail, and it becomes very corrupted, and it pervades the entire nail that has the odor of the fetent, and its end is made, and its color becomes black.
When you have that cold humor that they told you about in the division and it does not relieve your pain, then you should cover that you need to take all the surplus that is rising from the unguent and apply a cautery to the affected area, as cauterization is often used for this purpose.
If the bones are hard and the unguent is healthy, and the addicts of the unguent want to understand the carnuts at the points of the dint, and then push and lead that, you should cover that subtle part with your hand, and press that on the angle of the unguent that punched the carnut, and pull it in and insert it into the carnut for ease, and place your hand over it so that the painful carnuts do not reappear; and cure that am enguentz so that it is healthy.
If corruption has already taken hold in the bones, then cover that you need to take the bones and the extraguants, because no time is healed when it is in the corrupted bones.
And if sometimes the corrosion and corruption come into the dit, then cover that you need to take it in one of the noses according to what is recommended for its rememoration, and cure that within it so that it is healthy.
If pain is felt in the thigh at the end of percussion or striking, and the pain is very severe, then you should immediately cut off the thigh, and dry it with wet salt on a transverse slice through its entire length, and keep it so that the slice does not enter into the flesh that is now exposed by the thigh, as you will later inflict severe pain on the thigh for the cause of excessive flesh in that place; and also cure that place with what yields pain.
If it is tightly fitted, which is common in many men, very much so in the bones, or very much so in the thigh,
And if the skin of the joint is born in the body, or is the birth of the joint in the skin of the nails of the fingers. If that which is born in the skin of the finger is not bad, and this which is born in the joints is very bad.
And of those which are born from flesh, the slice is lighter, and it is that you must cut off its own skin with wet salt.
When the patient was born in the region of the joint, the treatment is difficult; therefore, keep the patient away from the abscess of the joint.
When there is pain in the shoulder, cover it with your hand and press gently with a suitable tool to alleviate the pain. Then care for that area until it becomes healthy again.
If the joint becomes more stable due to injury or for reasons such as plague or fire combustion, or illusion, then cover that stability with your hand and press gently with a suitable tool to alleviate the pain. Then care for that area until it becomes healthy again.
And pause between the enfused limbs in red oil so that they do not become too stable and separate them, or pause between them with a thin layer of fluid underneath so that it becomes consolidated afterwards.
And if it seems that there is stability in the joints of the hand, then dry that stability according to what has been prepared and is suitable for the figure of the member.
From the inscription of veins, they are varicose.
Veins are varicose and they are full of large, superfluous melancholic veins that flow through the limbs of the body, and more so in the joints, and especially in the joints of itinerants and laborers and those who wear heavy clothing.
When you have to administer a purge of the heart for black blood with some strong expelling substances, and draw blood from the basilar vein of the patient.
The second part of the cure for them is to cut and burn that black sin, and the other hand is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
The cutting of the sin is done according to this hand: first, it begins with the gallbladder duct, which is entered when the black sin is resolved, and is feculent from the duct, and then the duct of the liver is stretched at the point of departure of the wound in the thigh, and a bowel is placed on either side of the denuded part of the wound up to the end of the gallbladder, and the vein is dried in one place or two or three, and the black sin is removed from the liver through the second opening, and it is placed in the juice, when the sin is as much as you wish and as many times as you want, and it tolerates the virtue of the liver.
And apply that, and command him to abstain from black bile-producing foods.
When the veins are swollen and it is noticed in the thigh, it is customary to perform varicose vein surgery.
You should raise the thigh, if it is swollen with blood, and put the leg in a bag and massage the knee of the tail to prevent it from being pulled inwards and the veins from becoming enlarged; or if it has been exercised with strenuous exercise, enter that member when it is swollen.
And cut the codon on the right side of the vein at a distance or at the end, or at the base of the vein you need to remove the part.
And open the codon with an incision and cut the vein through its entire length until it appears in the sensation, and you must see that it sometimes turns black.
And when you remove and cut the codon, you sometimes see that white thread is left.
And place your hand further up the thigh when it is raised and swollen, and hold on to that member with one hand.
When another cut is made in the same way on that section for three days, and the bandage is removed from the area inside where the vein appears, it will be appropriate.
Then lift that and insert your thumb into the second section, and extract it and lift it inside where it is hard for the second section, and extract it from the section that is over it.
Then insert it inside where you extracted the pus from that was under the skin or from all the sections, and then insert your finger inside.
If it does not obey and follow your orders to extract and lift, then insert a needle of firm, double-pointed metal into that section, extract it, or insert the rod of the thong and turn your hand over to all parts where it is squeezed. And be careful not to insert it; if it is broken, it will be difficult to lift that hand and it will come over the thigh for that injury.
When that is completely out, place your hand over the location of the wet wool that was immersed in vinegar and rose oil and not in rose oil, and cure it inside where it is healed.
If the wound is obstructed by a certain twist in which it is involved, and there is no straight path after that, then you should cover that part of the twist and the locations of involvement with your hand, and suspend it above where it rises.
And keep your section safe that you have not pierced the vein and that it does not cause any harm to that; and use your caution in that.
The form of the incision made by the wound is:
It is not the wound that is affected as the points or by sharp extremity because it does not pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility, which if it were subtle, would pierce the vein with its subtlety; there are in it too much grossness as has been said.
Extraction of the thigh vein.
This vein is generated in the lower parts of the thighs, which are low and flat like the Ategian land in Arabia and in the low and dry lands of India with little fertility and without grass or herb.
When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate other parts of the body, it is called gout by doctors.
The treatment of the wound is putrid matter that I see coming from the chest as venom from serpents, snakes, and asps, and other things being born between the chest and the flesh.
The susceptibility of the wound's occurrence is from this vein that happens in the flesh inflamed; and the place is pustulated; and it starts the vein there, which seems to be like a plant.
When the wound reaches its end, you must cover it with a piece of cloth from a dragon's egg, which is the foot of a dragon. Enter into it, and stop on that and lower the suspended piece of cloth from the flesh.
So many watches do you make of the wound to any cause in the deformed parts, cover it with cloth and lower that. If it is prolonged, you must cut a part of the wound and wrap it around; and if you do not cut that which is outside, then if you cut that which is inside and enter into the flesh, it will cause scarring and purpura in the place and ulceration bad.
When the affected area is treated with care and is slowly extracted bit by bit, it is important that it is not pushed back into the body cavity and does not cause any further problems in the body.
This vein is found in many men who have a length of twenty palms, and I have already encountered one that is twenty-two palms long.
If it is not timed correctly, insert the ray into the abdomen and perforate that long abdominal wall from the foot to the torso, entering when all of this water is evacuated from the matter, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and care for it as part of the cure for appendicitis.
This vein sometimes has ramps, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and goes to that horrible orifice, and is located in several horrible orifices.
And care for it as they have said in the division and with what has been said.
Of the section under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is caused in any land by the bovine disease if it has many veins that run through the shoulders and are few in the belly, and spread throughout the body and decay, and is shown to the feeling of the member in the member throughout which the spine is disrupted and comes out.
The generation of the child is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, and tapeworms, which are found in the intestines.
And it is feared for the malice of the patient, for when he enters the body and rises to the head, and passes into the brain, many worms enter him and destroy the brain, and then many convulsions occur.
When you want to heal that and extract it, you should not if you do not use the incision and exposure of the body and appendage to the patient's sensation, and then cover that which is over it and that which is further away from it with a cloth, and wet it over it and extract that.
If it is inflamed in the flesh and does not bleed, then you should pause cauterization with a pointed cautery on the spot where it hurts, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh which corrupts the place as they have said.
If that should have passed to the head of the wrist, you should tightly bind the overcoat on the strong stricture, and wet it over it, and extract that; and cover that this arm uses for the disfigurement of the heart by the use of medicines evacuating putrid humors, and keep away from generations producing putrefaction.
In the sectioning of the patient's illness.
This malignancy is unknown in our land, and it hurts the quality that appears in other members, and it is moved from member to member.
When you have already seen that which I recommend to you. I was called to attend a woman with a swollen arm in a village, and I found that her arm had a small inflammation in the vein of the forearm, and after an hour, I saw that the inflammation was going away as if silver were being poured into this, although I did not believe that it was, as if silver were being poured into this.
And then the pain in that place subsided and remained in the muscle, and after about an hour it stopped.
And then the pain spread to the other arm that was affected by the other arm.
I recommend that you rotate the affected arm as much as possible; and it is amazing to see the change in the arm and the speed of the member to member. When you have already seen that in the best hands this is not done, but you have seen how those who do it cause great pain to be rotated from member to member. I have not seen that in the hands as in the woman.
When I realized that it was not gout, but rather a different condition, as the female was quite young, with many corsets and visible veins, and at that time there was a sensation of cold permutations.
When it is necessary that this retro-curacy does not appear in those who are delicate and have humors that are clouded by veins.
When you wish to perform the curacy of the patient and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the husk as they have said, but tighten over that and then leave the leg and seal over that within which is that ventosity carved, and cauterize the place.
If you do not see the wound in the fleshy parts, then perform your cure on that excuse of the heart and excrete that which expels ventosity and carminatives of those pills made from saffron and serapin and semblances.
Extraction of sage.
Sage is diverse according to the species and locations of the heart in which it is plucked, for that diversity is that of those which have large points, and small, concave, and narrow ones; and of those which have three angles, and of those which have tongues; and of those which have stars.
2. When the symptoms of the servant are seen in the member, and the bones pass over the skull, and the cyphal which is above the brain, which happens due to the vehement soda, vertigo, dizziness, and loss of consciousness in the limbs, inflammation and spasm of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and much of the word is separated and destroyed by the tooth, and the location of the wet humidity white-like polls is seen, and the semblance of the sign of flesh appears at the sight.
If you find this situation difficult for you, then avoid the cure and the extraction of the semen, as it may cause harm.
Mays the symptoms of the semen when it is in the body, as if it were close to the left thigh, and no harm is caused; and the movement of the semen resembles the movement of the hand, and the color of the pus is black and thin, and the coldness of the extremities disappears, and the wound heals; and therefore you know that the death has taken its course.
And when the semen has caused the lung to swell with sanious pus and the vessels that are prop of the collar have been displaced, and the color of the thigh has changed, and great spirit is exhaled, and there is a desire for fresh air.
And if the semen is in the sac that is in the chest, and the pain occurs in the small costas, and a great sharp pain is felt in the back and in the breathing, and not all the muscles are affected.
If the saffron is found in the stomach, then it is likely that the patient has some undigested food causing diarrhea.
If the woman's abdomen is filled with something, and it remains there, and any part of the plague, cloth, or intestine that is disrupted, and there is no hope for the removal of the abdomen.
If the woman's abdomen catches in the bladder, and it is discharged with urine, and the cause of the defects in the parts of the bladder is unknown, and there is much pain in the thighs, you know that it is mortal.
The other members are similar to the face, neck, and shoulders, and the spine and vertebrae, and the collarbone and ribs, and the scapula and humerus, and the bones of the limbs, which are saved according to the larger dispositions when the abdomen does not obstruct the vein or artery and is not gangrenous.
And I recommend this to you that you have seen of the nature of these abdomens, so that you know about their cure.
The cause is, that in a man who has an abdomen in the lacrimal of the eye of the head, and you extract it from another part, and then the gray of the hair grows back, and it heals, and does not accumulate in the socket of the nose.
When I extricated another woman from a Jew, who had her in the grayness of his sleeve, and his hand was already out, and the woman was hidden and not found by that alone, but rather by a small extremity at which she adhered to the man's sleeve, and it was a great sageta of the sharp sagetas of the Turks, with a leon in which there were no earrings.
The Senate was the Jewish, and it did not happen in the grayness of the man's sleeve by accident.
I extracted another woman from a man of the Crestia, who was trapped in the gallbladder, and it was an Arab sageta, and that was the one with the earrings; and then I inserted it over the guidegi, and it was already submerged in the gallbladder of the man; and then I subtly took it out, and extracted it, and cured the Crestia.
I extracted another woman from a man of the stomach, who was trapped in the belly, and thought that he would die for that; and then, because I had been there for 30 days and had not moved over it for any reason, I inserted it over the sageta and operated on that, and it was cured, and it did not happen an accidental malady.
When a man is found to have a sore on his thigh, and the wound is closed and hardened over it, and there is about an inch of fever, and the sore is in the middle of the thigh, it is called a gangrene.
When a woman is found to have an abscess on her belly, and the pus is firm and does not change in its position, and the woman does not bleed in any of her natural functions, it is called an abdominal abscess.
When a man is found to have an abscess on his face, and the pus is firm and does not change in its position, and the abscess does not cause pain here, and it does not resemble any of these, it is called a facial abscess.
When the abscess was removed from the man of the first prince of the king who had it on the middle of his nose and had already discharged a small amount of pus, and the entire abscess was hidden, it is called a nasal abscess.
And you were called to the care of the patient for the drainage of the abscess within three days.
When the plague of the serpent has been exhausted; and then you inquired about that which was tempting, and did not feel it; but you felt it later at the tip of your finger, and then you wondered if that prick was from the end of the serpent.
Then I examined the place where the virtue is attractive and digestive, assuming that this place is what appears to me as the location of the serpent, because it has passed over that.
And no accident happened in the place that you considered to be the location of the serpent; and you continued to press on it for days without any accident; and the plague became stable, and the thigh of the extremity of the serpent was affected by space for several days until I sensed the serpent in my nose and reconnected this to me.
Then you placed your hand on the acute, corrosive medicine for several days until it was burned; and you applied that to the tempting one and exhausted it, and you exhausted the end of the serpent's subtle part, which adhered to the nail.
When you have adjusted the patient's position in the palsy due to that acute medicine, which I visibly saw was the end of the toe, and it passed my time as this was within the time frame of four months.
I supposed that the palsy was amplified, and I could enter the forceps into it, and maintain it there, and not decrease its size, as you did not cease to subtly and inventively adjust it using your hands over those of the engineers, when I began to use the forceps descentment points on that day, according to what was in the middle of the caput; and I restored that palsy.
The doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the palsy was consolidated, and it became healthy for the entire thigh, and did not return to that in any cause.
I recommend to you the quality of extracting some toes according to this rule and its significance, which I have not mentioned, that four parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in my narrative or not understood by me.
The first source sentence translates to: "The skilled physician knows about many things; and it is necessary that what is present be compared to what is absent; and the novelty of the operation and the novel instrument required for the descent of the strange causes of the art when they occur.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
When that which is in the place where it is inserted or comes out, or is caused by flesh, and is stung and pulled out.
And if you do not obey the time when it catches fire, then you should lay it for several days inside the skin of the foot, and let it be attracted by the skin and its exit.
And if it remains in the bone and does not obey your time of insertion, then you should lay it for several days and repeat that which attracts it and causes it to move on each day, and it will be pulled out.
And if you do not obey the time of insertion for several days, then you should lay it for you to perforate in the circuit of the sedative in that bone of total part where it is subtlely attracted by the sedative, and extract that.
If the saddle is already resisting in the location of the knee, and is resisting the feeling, then you need to inquire about that threat, and if you feel it, then shoot that threat with the sturments that are convenient for the attachment of the horse.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constraint of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins here, then you need to press on the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the saddle.
And if it is held by the horse's horns that are held, then you need to cut the flesh in which it is fixed from all parts of the whole engagement; and engage over this, if you cannot escape the flesh in the fracture of the horns and in twisting of those that obey.
When you are performing the extraction of the uterus in any location where it is, use your own twist of the forceps and forceps to all parts that come within reach of that obese one; and subtly use the subtlety that the uterus is not torn and is faithfully attached to your difficult attraction of it and of that extraction.
If you cannot find the remedy for that in your time, then take it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of the body are moistened, and then apply it again where you want to relieve it. If you are opposed to taking this medicine, you should administer the one that has been prescribed in the capital city.
And guard your virtue from incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and apply any medicine you can possibly find to prevent the escape of the wound; and may it be easy, calm, and slow, and firm and sure as you have commanded.
And then you should make the wound as small as possible, so that this thigh is second in size to the figure that has been prescribed, and the pain of the wound should be less. If this is not possible for you, you should administer what is possible according to the figures.
The wounds that are caused by contraction in the opposite direction of another part, or that have already been treated in other parts of the same part, or cause gillbositat of the wound due to the feeling of the part pushed aside from the tendon, then you should cut over that; and it should be the seccio according to the quantity in which they take hold with the forceps; and then atra a that part, so that it is slightly contracted in the esssiment.
If the joint is held in the bone, then you should twist the arm in the opposite direction when the finger presses on the bone, and widen it as much as possible, and pull it out.
Otherwise, keep holding that for several days, and repeat it as needed.
If the joint of the finger is in that position, then push it with your hand.
If the joint of the finger is stuck and needs to be treated with pressure, then insert your hand into it, if it's tight, stretch it so that the cavity of the finger fits inside the concave part of the thumb and push it with your hand.
If the thumb is concave, then push it with your hand as hard as possible, until the thumb is held in place by that.
If the finger is intoxicated, then cover the entire flesh in which it is located, as much as possible, and take care of that as needed, and if necessary, treat it with something appropriate.
If the finger is caught in the chest, or in the stomach, or in the abdomen, or in the side, and it is necessary to touch that part for treatment, and it is possible to cover it with something, then cover it with something and keep track of the vein or nerve, and pull it out, and apply it, and if necessary, clean it when it is healed, and treat it.
The first line can be translated as: "The shape of forceps that are used when the teeth are pulled out:". This line seems to be discussing dental forceps,
The second line can be translated as: "And their ends are like that of a saw, which is sharp when we hold it on the tooth so that we do not hurt it." This line seems to be describing the shape and use of dental forceps. The ends of the forceps are compared to a saw blade, which is sharp and can cut or grasp the tooth without causing pain.
The third line can be translated as: "And they are made of special movements, large and small and medium-sized, according to the size of the tooth and the width of the gum, and the width of the gap, and the constriction of the tooth." This line seems to be describing the design and function of dental forceps. The movements of the forceps are specialized to fit the size of the tooth, the width of the gum, and the width of the gap between the gum and the tooth. The constriction of the tooth is also considered in the design of the forceps.
The second line seems to be discussing how to alleviate pain at the tip of something. A possible translation could be: "And if it is necessary to relieve pain at the tip of the intestine, then push it into the concave pouch.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is the one that gives the curvature of the wild elk's leg; the second is the sciatic vein, the location of which is the wild elk's leg; the third is the venous sinus, the location of which is the domestic elk's leg; and in the leg there are other similar veins like those.
The juice of the veins that are closest to the ears is used for making catalytic ancient and migraines, coughs, and ulcers of the old head.
And the quality of squeezing those is second to what you recommend to me: it should be sharp at the base of the head, and sharp at the base of the head in the occipital region in the location of the good friction; apply pressure to the head with a tongue inserted between the teeth where the eyes and the holes of the same are located in two points of the head; and that is what you said, and if you feel the tips of those in the said way, here it is.
You should take the sharp lancet, and that is the one that is incident, and then you should introduce that point into the vein through that hole that goes to the bone that meets the bone. And then lift your hand and hold the vein and codon in parts, and insert the vein into the incision made earlier. And is the length of the incision two thirds or an eighth of that; and then do the scar as much as you want.
And then tighten the powder and remove it inside where it is healed.
And then earlier in the beginning of the freeing of the wound, make an incision and cauterize those and theirs.
More of the arteries are venas that are the templars' jewels, the advantage of the fleubotomy is in the old migration and it is evil and insatiable and for the corps of sharp superfluous effusions in the sides.
And the quality of fleubotomizing those is second to what you recommend to me: strengthen the thigh the way you want, enter the space where the arteries appear at the feeling per appearance and manifestly demonstrate the hands of theirs' end the said; and then do as you please.
When you have raised the patient's collar over the vein and inserted the forceps into the desired position, and raised the vein above it; and insert it as you have done in the other veins; and make it run along the line of your need.
Then, remove the forceps from the patient's thighs and place the thumb on the vein for an hour, and place your thumb on that point and stretch it as much as possible, and release it from that point when it is healed.
And the preceding reminder of them and those that were inserted, and the attraction at the beginning of the free end.
And the advantage of fleebotomy on the veins of the face is that it is similar to the fleebotomy of the cephalic vein in old wounds of the face, and emigration, and hardness, and ulcers.
And the quality of the fleebotomy is according to what you recommend to me; this is because the thigh stretches the inner part of the leg where the vein appears; and hold the instrument that is called the forceps of which this is the form of it:
Pause the point that is on the top of the fossa over the vein and percussions over it with the thumb or another part of the hand, and leave the sand to run according to the quantity you want; and remove the incision of the thigh and tighten the part that is healed.
If some incisions are made by sharp instruments, it is not necessary that the flebotomy be at the end of the vein as with the others, but rather it should be at the middle, and the flebotomy should be made on the second transverse section, where the four bones are pushed in and the hand can easily tear through the flebotomy when it is subtle.
The advantages of the two veins that are the lacrimal veins of two hairs for the scabs on the hairs and the secretions in the hairs, and for the wounds of the face.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that the thigh stretches the collar, and the flebotomy is made on those, and you should stay on the head of the patient.
If the incision is made along the transverse axis for a certain length, and in that location there is no flesh; and if the incision is made very carefully, then the end of it will be quite sharp.
And as much as it is necessary to run the lancet, and stop over those knots, and stretch them with a new one, and then untie them.
The incisions of the veins in the nose are often associated with acute fever and sudden vomiting, and with the diseases of the face and eyes and rigidity that occur in the face, and especially when it is old.
The quality of the incision of the thigh is that it stretches the collar and holds the nape with the right hand, and takes the incision very fine long and places it in the middle of the vertex of the nose according to rectitude, where the vein does not appear at the sensation here, and where the sanc begins to flow so much.
Cover that you recently made your patient's thighs small incisions and ran the lancet according to your need; and then tie it with a new one, where it is restored gently.
May the advantage of vaginal surgery for the female guide to confinement, the beginning of leprosy and the onset of malnutrition and impetigo and corrosive ulcers as hypotyphos.
The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that the thigh stretches away from each part in the foot; and the artisans should be on the head of the thigh, and the thigh should be placed on a bed.
The fleebotomy should be long enough to reach the end of the vein, and it should be extracted in small pieces or as needed that it may be necessary; and it should resemble another vein.
And remove the ligament and stretch the other veins by tightening them so that the thigh does not become twisted, and let it enter the matter where the plague is healed.
The advantage of the fleebotomy of the veins is that it reduces small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers in the nose and in the circuit of the thigh.
The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that it relieves the thigh from twisting, and tightens the thigh of the patient with a needle, and turns the lips of the patient and looks at the other veins of which one is on the left side of the lip and the other on the right; and the demonstration of each is by the nose of each of those small black veins; and then inserts each in the incision made in the incision.
If you doubt any further, and do not know which one it is among them, then understand the appearance of the majority of them, and the manifestation of the pus from them.
And see the appearance of the veins that are in the lips above.
It is customary to insert the veins that are in the tongue further, and at the prefrontal area of the head, at the malformation of the uvula, and at the malformations of the mouth.
The quality of the fleubotomy is that it follows the malformation between the patient's thighs, raises the tongue, and watches further the tongue, from one vein lump to another vein lump, and the color of each is turning black.
And continue to fleubotomize each one; and keep watching that you do not end the tongue before the fleubotomy of those, for those are arteries.
When the veins in your groin have been previously incised in the area where it is customary for all men to have them, and the incision of their veins is made with two forceps, or place an oil-soaked cloth on the subtlety declining; or use a vascular forceps, and call it a clamp, and this is the form of it:
The width of the vein is such that it should open the concave full vessels appearing as large ones and to those that contain thin tortuous ones.
And this fleabootomy is of less width and with a subtle extremity, and it is convenient for the fleabootomy of subtle veins that contain thin subtle citrus.
More the benefit of the fleabootomy of the basilica vein which is one of three veins: four extraxt the sanc of the maladies that are from the left side of the guolayro and the col, and from that which is seized by the pietz and the ventre.
It is recommended to the surgeon when performing the incision, that he keeps it open and be careful not to injure any nearby structures, if he accidentally cuts an artery, it will cause bleeding of the sanguine fluid, so that he does not accidentally cut too deeply into the flesh, and be cautious not to cut through the tendon.
If the basilica does not appear clearly, you should cover that and move to another place, or surround that with some ram; or if you cut in the end of the arm where it is visible, and cover that with flesh as they have said.
If you want to cut the incision of the metheglin, you should cover the stricture of the arm that touches the location inside where the location of the fingers is, and cover it with your hand; and cut the arm and cut the vein in a concave way that is opposite to the flesh as they have said; and make sure to cover the percussion for the space of the artery location.
When you see that the joint is stiff, notice that the swelling is in the location you have observed, and then press on that swelling.
If the sweat flows during the circumcision like silver of a child, and the sweat is subtle, you know that it is from the sweat of the artery; and you cut and place your hand on that part over long space; and if the sweat is abscised, four watches pass before it is abscised, then you tighten the arm and let go of that.
You should guard the wound of the foot, and place a bandage over it, not removing it for several days until it is healed.
If the sore does not heal, and sometimes you are not present to give medicine for it, you should pierce the artery if you see it; cut at the extremity of the foot, and the wound will be released; or take a sharp stick, and push it in, and hold it there over the location of the vein that is strictly compressed by the limb and the pulley on another day.
And if the wound is healed, that is good; and if not, you should cure that of which the dust of the wound flows from the sore.
The opening of the sore of the foot is difficult in positions that are not suitable for the small location of the plague and the possibility of the limb of the arm.
More often than not, fleebotomy is the best way to extract the sore from the subcutaneous location of the head and to the extremity of the chest; therefore, it is composed of ram from the basilica and ram from the cephalica, as they have said.
When the anesthesia is applied to the area that is feared in the anesthesia of the patient, four things are found there; and then if it adjusts in the puncture of the anesthesia and paralyzes the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it is difficult to cure the patient, and for most people it is not cured, and this nerve that is seen moves with the feeling; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, you cover that you are opening the anesthesia as the one you open the anesthesia with the section of the knife, and avoid the nerve in your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of cranial veinotomy is that it relieves head pain and alleviates the symptoms of cerebral hemorrhages.
And cover this exactly, if you want the veinotome to cut the veins or just the veins, and that is the salvation of all the veins, and not the artery or the nerves.
However, it is more important that you do not postpone the craniotomy in cases where it has not been performed on the first percussion, and you will not notice the aphasm in the future.
The first source sentence translates to:
When there is pain in the joint, it is called gout by doctors. On the third day, or on the first morning after three hours have passed, the surgery will be performed.
The less the surgery is administered, the more it is convenient and necessary at that time, or not at all, or on another day, in total time and in every hour.
And it is not possible to perform a fleubotomy if there are forty years old and the woman has not been operated on until the fourth month after seven, and the elderly are not operated on those who have passed sixty years.
And if a man wishes to be operated on by any surgeon, it is necessary that the intestines be tied before the operation, if they have been fixed with a clamp, because the veins do not cause damage to the joints of the intestines, which are pure and do not harm the main members.
And the intestines are not operated on by the naive and sacred flesh of the pus, nor by evacuation of mucus or diarrhea, nor ebriety within which it is useful to be within this time of theirs, nor intoxication, and less that fleubotomy is feared by colic pain and vomiting, and cost of stomach, and multiplication of coitus and work and exercise of sleep or watchfulness and all causes that dissolve the virtue, or is corporeal or animal.
And if you consider in subtlety of the humors that cause this, then the sinew is large, with thin and short tendons, and the medicines are such as can be applied to this part.
And if you do not prevent it from being wet, or exercise it with some exercise to make the sinew subtle.
And stop the foot operation on the patient's chest, it is now the time for third relief, as they have said.
And tell him that this chest should be guarded on that day of all animal accidents, as it is with anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporal accidents, as it is with labor and excessive pain and appearance of like things.
And in his own handwriting, the causes are present in the use of the quality that is customary for men, and it is aromatic and odorous and has balsams and similar things according to the second quantity of possibility.
And follow the foot operator on a cushion that is placed or that it has been placed, and on the one who has undergone the operation.
When extracting the arm, and cut it at that point with the surgeon's knife or three times; and then tightly tie the wound with a thread and wrap that around the knife.
If the stricture is temporary, that is, the stricture that does not cause constipation, or if it is superfluous, you are forbidden to take laxatives; or if it is mollificatory, and you are forbidden to take too much food.
And if the stricture is applied, it is said that the one who gives birth must cut the muscles of the abdomen between them so that the veins are inflamed and are declared in the feeling.
And the knife is made of the patient's own bone; and then stops the patient's hand on that vein, that place where the incision is to be made, so that the vein comes out a little, and the percussion is placed on the vein that is closest to the flesh, and that which is full of wind and when you stop the incision over it, the incision must be closed by the incision, and the incision does not tighten the vein, and if it does, it is stretched.
And so, in order for this knife to be stopped and to remain in all of these causes.
When you have paused the incision, if the vein is pulsating in a vein, leave it alone; otherwise, you will have to make another incision further on, or over the area where the intestine is twisted, if that part is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen, or the thigh is lax, you should lay the patient for a day or two, and do not strain the limbs, for fear of causing an apostematous caudate, nor should you put on wet clothes.
And if necessary, you will have to repeat the incision if the blood is coagulated.
And if the healing is small and slow, and you fear that it will not heal the desired amount, you should repeat the incision in that direction, making sure to adjust the wound a little each time, and if the area is swollen, you must make fewer cuts.
If the area has already become swollen, do not repeat the incision over it, as there is no cause for you to do so; and pause over that certain part of the thong, where the wound is, in order to alleviate the pain of the wound. When it is better in this place than oil and the others.
When it appears that the incision is bleeding excessively in total abdominal surgery, which cuts the veins and causes obstruction of the coronary artery, and thrombosis occurs at the same time, and when the sanc (heart) becomes subtle and begins to revolve when it gets larger, it is necessary to stop the incision.
If in the location of the laparotomy a great aposteme is generated, four observed motions occur, and most importantly for that which has not been bled but that vein, or in the engorgement of the small vein, and you cut, and place your hand over the location, soaked with water infused with air and salt, a few scalpels, and hold it for an hour, that is dissolved.
And cover that with this to the end of the sinus of that vein or of another vein.
If Roman is present in the location for several days with any blackness or greenish color, it is not known; and if you want, place your hand over that cause of dissolution and mirrort, or any cause of sweat or wool or semblant of the like.
Four observed motions occur in postoperative laparotomies and eminences of the basilica.
Then place your hand over that, and if you cut, you must place your compression on that, and the eminence of that is evil and bad; and then keep in mind that you have placed your hand over that any cause of water that has been said, for much to flow from the sinus arteria.
When the area is dressed with an astringent, because it must be endured, and care should be taken for that, it is appropriate to apply this to the other part of the wound after it has healed.
And cover that which is taken from the sanctuary to all men according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color they come out, and then the sanctuary appears.
And if the sanctuary is black, then you must put it in when it is rough, and apparently if you see it large, put it in when it is subtle; and if it is sharp, when its sharpness is left, leave it.
And cover that which is large and strong and needs extraction of the sanctuary through a vein, where the flebotomy of the vein is expanded and the flebotomies are left.
And in that which is thin, make the opposite of that, and cover that in troops of veins, and that the truss be straight.
And the best way to administer flebotomy of the vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
This maneuver of lithotomy is saved from the flow of sand and the injury of nerves, and it is praised and considered safe for performing lithotomy at different latitudes and longitudes.
When gout (or "sincopi") is customary, you must perform fleubotomy, and cure the patient with a small dose of an infusion made from one hundred grains or simple oxide; extract the urine from the bladder in three or four draughts.
If there is fever of the collection, you must take an infusion of urine made from one hundred grains or a simple oxide infusion made from aromatic essences such as ginger, cinnamon, and spices like cloves, nutmeg, and simmonds, or an aromatized essential oil.
If gout (or "sincopi") occurs, you must perform fleubotomy due to the severity of the urinary disorder, and take an infusion of animal juice with aromatic essences such as ginger, cinnamon, and spices like cloves, nutmeg, and simmonds, or an aromatized essential oil. Use aromatics wisely, and keep the side effects in mind.
And use other causes that have been mentioned in the division on the capital of gout for elimination.
When the pain in the arm becomes severe and second-hand sight is lost, it is considered that the arteriosclerosis has occurred in the affected area, and the veins are distended, which evacuate the blood drop by drop, so it is followed by the amount of blood in the following days.
When the pain in the arm becomes severe and second-hand sight is lost, and the veins are distended, the heart also becomes strong, and the patient must suffer for about seven hours or nine days of the first herniabtomy.
When the pain in the heart becomes severe and opposite to the direction of the vessel, it is considered that it has occurred on the second or third day.
When the pain in the heart becomes severe and opposite to the direction of the vessel, it is considered that it has occurred on the second or third day. If the heart is already scalded and sharp, and if the fever occurs in one vein and a large amount of blood is evacuated, then it is amplified within the sincopi; and you will have preserved all the conditions of herniabtomy; and you must hold the heart of the sanc with your hand, so that it does not die in place of sincopi, four more veins are emptied every time the herniabtomador is ignorant and negligent.
When you want to slide the arm and remove the second vessel, as the wound of the vein is closed and the pain of the artery is difficult, then press subtly with that force and bend your hand inward, curving it slightly, as this is too much.
When the knife enters the flesh according to the cut; or it remains with this acuteness of the cut that is coagulated by the force in the vein; or it is placed over the tissue alfarach, or saggenea, and compresses that with a compressor inside where the sanc is outside and out.
If the vein is gangrenous, then cut that and do not touch it inside where the gangrene is settled.
And if it is necessary to cause you to evacuate the sanc according to the order, and not to excuse, then cut that over that place or in the other arm on another vein.
And the vein called "the thigh's cord" is cut in place of the fuscus or basilica, when it is not hardened or dried out, four are composed of those.
And the quality of the cut of that is that the thigh introduces its hand into the watery tail inside where the focus seduces and that the vein appears clearly.
When the tightness is on that side of the joint, and the incision is made according to the short transverse line, not latitudinally nor along the length.
And is the incision wide and is your fleebotomy at that which you fleebotomize over the joint of the knee?
And if the flow of the wound is prohibited, then you repeat the knee in the water tail and let the sand run in the water until you can fulfill your necessity.
If you were in the days of summer, then you would be excused from the repetition of the knee in the water tail, and the time would pause the corse of the sand in the water tail during the summer.
And the fleebotomy of this vein is put saved that of all the others, four out of five do not have a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the fleebotomy of the sole of the knee is compared to the maladies of the foot.
And the quality of the fleebotomy is that you tighten the knee with the leg or with your hand, placed because you have placed it in the water tail, when the vein is inflamed and is shown at the same time; and the incision is made according to that transverse line; and if not cut along that, not everything will be saved.
When it comes to saving the final part of your thighs, first remove the flesh from the three bones you have stripped bare.
Then it is best to insert the needle into the tail bone and let the sin run down there, but if you do not insert it in the tailbone, the sin will coagulate in the distal part of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
When you draw out the sin according to the amount of need, stop over the vein or artery and do not solidify it too much; it seems that you are doing this in all straight lines.
The advantage of the thighotomy on that side is that it is similar to the maladies of the pelvis.
And do it in a similar way in the thighotomy as you have done in the other.
The advantage of the thighboneotomy is that it is similar to the maladies of the pelvis, which are found in the part where the other bones are located, such as those in the thigh, and also in the ulcers of the legs and old changes, and they seem to be similar to the maladies.
The quality of the fleshotomy in this case is that the wound enters the desired location in the vein and then passes over the joint of the foot; it covers the vessel of the ankle with a small cut, and the location of the vein appears at the tip of the foot, and that ramifies into the face of the foot with multiple branches.
And therefore, the fleshotomy should be made large enough to cover the cushion of the leg, and the cut should be made at the level of the calf, which is better and will cause less pain.
If you make the fleshotomy on that part of the foot, be careful not to cut any nerves that are located there, and stop your fleshotomy at the point where you want to make the incision, as if you were inserting it.
And if the fleshotomies are correct.
However, if it is prohibited to insert the drain, you should repeat the foot of the patient in the vein and let the drain run through that which has been evacuated.
And if the fleshotomist err on the first vein, you should repeat at the fleshotomies in a smaller place, where the location is safe; and do not fear for the malician, rather be careful of the nerves as they have been said.
When it appears that there is an unnatural growth of the other foot's sole.
When from the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, you must leave the tip in the cavity of the wild part.
And the advantage of the surgical treatment for the foot is that it can be done quickly when it is possible to cauterize.
The quality of the fleebotomy is that it quickly enters the bag, and tightens and stretches the leg of the wide part within the tube of four teeth under a long, thin needle, which does not appear except for this.
And when it appears, you perform the fleebotomy on that second course which is nearest to you and then along the transverse, and is better; or if you are inclined to do it by incision or cutting, the place of the foot is sore.
And it is in the hands of many who are careful; and if you cut that, and it does not appear to the whole, you perform the fleebotomy on some part of the foot, and that which appears in the two of the foot's end with the ear and the ring.
And be careful of the nerves, and make the cauterization run according to the amount you want.
When it is necessary to relieve the stricture and place a pillow over the location of the incision, in order to apply pressure and thus heal the wound.
Of wind and the quality of those things.
Wind is of corn, or of hair, or of vegetables.
And wind is caused by one of these: the first is a scarification and the extraction of sand, and the second is the wind itself.
And this wind that causes the scarification is made by one of these: either it is made by fire or by the fire.
And the winds that are made by scarification and the extraction of sand are fourteen locations of the body, of which one is the location where the other winds are placed, and it is the same part of the head; and the location of the other winds is at the corner of the chin; and winds of the mouth are placed outside of the mouth; and winds of spatulas; and winds of a louse, and two feet; and winds of two candles, and two brushes; and winds of holes; and winds of holes.
The first source sentence translates to:
When labor pains are necessary due to childbirth or continuing, apply this remedy at the beginning of the month at the start of the cycle and throughout the entire time until the end of the month, and in the same location as before and whenever it is needed.
And when you notice in any cause of these, and indeed if it is in the third or fourth week of the month, then do command that the labor pains be made to occur as soon as two or three hours have passed since the day.
When the windpipe of the neck is affected by gravity and falls into the head, and more so when it is found to be an evacuation of all the body, then...
This windpipe is in the location of a frontal lobotomy.
And it is not necessary to use that which is of complex complexity, or in that which is of catarrh, for it does not give the great remedy.
And therefore, it is not necessary to use those on the eyes, and in the heads of those who are diseased with loose foreskins.
Moreover, if one continues to sit on it, there is the risk of forgetfulness; and therefore, it is necessary that you command the windpipe to pause its movement for a short time in the parts where it has been, in order to avoid the generation of forgetfulness.
Less windpipe of alchemy is in the location of a frontal lobotomy of the vein fusca and the basilica: and therefore, it affects asthma, and the constraint of the alveolus and the scissura of the sturment of the alveolus, and the throat, and the replecio.
The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French as well. I will try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English:
When the cold humor of the liver causes accidental pain in the head and throat, as well as in the eyes, and preferably in the teeth; and it is located in the region of the gallbladder.
And command the wind to not press with its hand, but rather with a sharp cut, so that the artery does not enter and cause a flow of pus.
The wind places the chin on the alcohol in the mouth, and on the corruption of the gingiva, and on the resemblance to those that are in the mouth of the sick, and it is located in the region of the gallbladder.
May the wind that is made on the teeth with spatulas be made of chalk, which is made for the purpose of removing heat.
And the wind that divides the teeth of the fire is good for the fleubotomy of three veins, which are of the gallbladder, black and capillary, those that are at the root of all those veins, and those that are in the carn, and those that are in the other veins, which are thick.
When commanding the surgeon not to perform too much excision, let the location be stripped of flesh, and then he should expose the nerves and arteries.
E is a wind that is used to blow on the thighs and buttocks to alleviate the pain of hemorrhoids and suppurating pus.
And command the surgeon to use a great wind, and that it be of earth, so that the place requires a deep cut; and then use subtle winds and perform excision by excision.
Many winds are needed to massage the limbs, and they reach the entire body, alleviating old pain in the joints, knees, and vagina; they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bothersomeness and inflammation; and they stay in location for fleshotomy of sternal wounds, and abdominal and pelvic cavities.
In the end, remove all the limbs and make incisions in the inner parts of the body.
And from the winds that are applied to the abdomen, the benefit is attributed to the winds applied to the limbs.
The quality of the position of the wind vessels is that they pause the wind at the beginning of its view and gradually pass by temperate air, and do not prolong the position of the wind vessels, less pause those gently, and return them gently, and that the humors come to the place by accidental encounter. Do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the location already enlarged and inflamed, and the signs of the disease appear.
And you should scrape and repeat the gentle dose in small amounts, and consider in the disposition of the chest.
Fourth, that person who has tender flesh of rare parts, cover it with a dressing and do not push, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the wind vessel to enlarge the scarification and pour a little, and make the gentle dressing easy.
If in the disease it grows, you should cover that you scrape several dressings, where in the first one you open the way of subtle passage to the disease and to the aquosity of the patient. In the second part of the acquisition of the extraction of the large sinus.
If the wound is foul-smelling, then make a scraping of the outer layer to allow it to heal.
And in order to remove small amounts or a little at a time, a scraping is sufficient for us.
If we want to remove a large amount of pus, make a deep scraping; and if we find that the pus is large, then make a deeper scraping.
The term of the scraping refers to the depth of the cut, which is done for no other reason.
If that of which the knife is thick, hard, dark, and the wounds are sharp, then make the cuts as deep as possible, making the openings of the veins larger, more easily resolvable; if it is in summer, use olive oil, olive oil of violat, olive oil of almonds, or olive oil of camomile; and if it is in winter, use olive oil of narcissus, olive oil of liri, olive oil of chamomile, or olive oil of the sanc, and in that manner.
If the superfluity is large, remove it, and if the oil is bitter, use olive oil, olive oil from balm, olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of aneth, and it will resemble them.
If the ventilator is of large parts of flesh, you cover that it is prohibited to oil, and cover that this loci of vents are prop to the ventozation sian lavatz am ayguaros or am aygua freja de solatrum, or am aygua de coja, or am aygua de bordolaguas, and it will resemble them.
And that of which the sand is of wet humidity, wash your vents with oil or water and myrtle and sumac and it will resemble them.
And of that of which the superfluities are large, wash your vents with oil or water and myrtle and sumac, which is majorana, or of decoccio of aneth, or of camamilla, and it will resemble them.
And cover that the ventilator is kept under the bath; having covered that it is administered properly of the bath for an hour or for two, and it will sleep with the ventilation.
This sentence is asking what it is necessary to do before a bloodletting procedure, which is a medieval medical practice involving the removal of blood from a patient. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "What must be done before a bloodletting procedure
This sentence is advising that if the person performing the bloodletting procedure (the venosator or bloodletter) is hot-tempered and prone to inflammation, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "If the person performing the bloodletting procedure is hot-tempered and prone to inflammation, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand.
This sentence is advising that if the person performing the bloodletting procedure pauses their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "If the person performing the bloodletting procedure pauses their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice,
This sentence is advising that if the person performing the bloodletting procedure stops their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "If the person performing the bloodletting procedure stops their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. They should also eat sparingly, avoid spicy foods, and drink plenty of water. The person performing the bloodletting procedure should also avoid excessive exercise and rest.
When in the day of ventozacio and flebotomy, the blood is greater than the food.
It is said that if some foods, such as Tyrian tiriacum or alpharac, are given in the blood, or if medicines for muscles are taken, they cause muscle weakness, or if the blood is drawn or the vein is punctured during ventozacio or flebotomia, or at any other time, then the main limbs are comforted and the wound is subsided; and it does not matter if the cautery is used.
There are many vents that are the result of previous scarifications, and on the thighs, toes, and umbilicus, and over the pelvis and wide ankle, where these members have not suffered scarification before.
And it is not desired for those only because of the wound of the member, but rather to pause the vents over the breast in the absence of the flow of the sanc from the narc, and to use that way where the ventositis freja is dissolved by the sanc of the member, and to pause over the stomach and umbilicus, so that the rarefied member is scalped and the pain that resolves the ventositis is caused.
When you have placed your hand over the thighs when they have fallen asleep due to cold or fatigue, it is advisable to do so for a short time in order to stimulate the lameness and eliminate the fatigue from that place.
And it seems that when you have placed your hand over the womb and the pessary, there is vibration in those enclosed parts.
These vibrations are administered with great care, and some are administered with fire.
And some vibrations are administered full of water in the womb's maladies.
And it is because the vibration is full and is pushed out, that the water comes out alone or in the water that is used to make it convenient for the patient.
Form of vibration administered with fire: it is the amplitude of the orifice of two thumbs, as we have formed them; and the quantity of the preon is the greatest of a palm; and it is in the place that is in the circuit, in the location where it enters one hole, the turn is small according to the quantity that enters one hole.
When there is pain in the joint, it is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the entire body, and pain occurs in the feet. This is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for this purpose. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out
And if it is the side of the gallbladder that is affected by cold or iron, where a candle is placed on the fire.
And if this ventilation is not as great as that which has been recommended; and the little more of that second that follows the malady and the state of that which uses it,
and the ventilations of the infants and exhausted are different from those of the young and large-bodied,
and the quality of placing this ventilation over the member is that it extends the fire made of wood gently with a little wax candle, and places it on the side of the transverse gallbladder in the location of the ventilation, so that the fire is lit around the part where it is not burned the body of the malady.
And if it is placed over the patient's thigh, and it is said that it is over the wound that has been made, then when you have your ventouses and do not indicate whether they have been put in and whether they are causing vapor to rise over that wound, then the ventouse should be so dissolved.
And properly follow the machine with your own hands, and do what is indicated in that.
The more ventouses that are administered to the patient's thigh of plauressi, and water, in which there is no transverse or wound, and it is only administered with water, and is placed over the member solely.
And this is the form of it: And this ventouse, the more grande it is, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 178.
Blood clots are not administered in any other members except in those members where it is impossible to place ventouses due to their small size, as well as the gum and resemblance of the same; or in a naked member of flesh, as well as the nose and later resemblance.
When it comes to the quality of using those that if you have found blood in the wounds of clean and unblemished skin,
And if they are swollen the day before and the wound is full of water, and there is no cause for it in the abdomen of those; and if the intestine has been evacuated at the beginning of the operation and the vents have been closed; and if the member of the thigh is swollen and has turned black; and if they are placed over it,
And when they are swollen and in case.
And if it is possible to suck the wound with the wind, it will heal faster.
Otherwise, wash the wound with clean water and apply it with moisture; and apply a poultice and wrap it.
And if the intestine is prolonged and the cement of the blood vessels, and it remains, then you should put a damp cloth under the water, and place it over that until the residue is absorbed.
And if the intestine is multiplied, you should powder vitriol or guards and similar substances on it, until the intestine is abscessed; or they are placed over the location with the nails of fresh beans excoriated, and they are swollen and the intestine adheres to the location, and the abscess is formed.
If necessary, repeat the bloodletting process when it is possible to change them.
If bloodletting is prohibited from being suspended, then make points on the location that is most recent or insert a needle into the locations entered that are sank; and place them at a distance of about those that feel any pain.
When you want to close them, sprinkle a little oil or salt and charcoal on those, and then close them as much as possible.
Now begins the treatment of the third part: from the restoration. This chapter is very important in the art of medicine; and it is about restoring fractures and accidental displacements in the bones.
Oh, child, know that this chapter is about the follies and vanities of doctors and those who in time will not pay attention to the freedoms of the Ancients nor read even one letter.
And for this reason this manuscript of the scientists in our land is private; and you are not obliged to pay for it in any time but only by the long reading of the freedoms of the Ancients and studying about their understanding of those, and then extracting the science of those.
And accordingly direct yourself to experiments and studies in the course of your life.
When I first described in this chapter the entirety of what I know and what has been passed down from my knowledge; I opened it up to you all and relieved myself of its burden; and I opened it further at its end; and I presented it at its end; and I formed it in various forms of sturments that I administer in that manner, as is done with an addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
Chapter one.
Summary and collections from the breaking of bones, from those whose release is necessary before we begin the remembrance of the members of the broken bones and their differences in each. Cover that we speak in the preface of the summary of this chapter; and the chapters for the understanding of those who at the beginning of it were the artificers and on the truth of those; so you and they who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And I say that when an accident occurs in any fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, you should take care to go to the beginning of amputation or aleyar that, or else employ someone who can, unless there is any prohibition, as if it is of great virtue, or it is the one that has happened, or it is due to old age, or it is the time of violent heat, or of violent cold.
And if the patient's diet consists mainly of herbs and meats of various kinds, and prohibits fatty meats and all foods that fill the veins of the member, then you should be careful to avoid aphthous cavities and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
When you return the intestine to its proper position, it should be placed in the first routine that is common for this patient.
When the wound begins to heal, it is important that the intestine is not surrounded by indigestible foods of nutritious foods that are hard and heavy in which the intestine is viscous, as those that are made from flour soaked in water, and meat, and bones, and feet of cows, and eggs, and fresh fruits, and vegetables that are large and similar to those, and this regimen is given a coagulation of fracture with lemons and honey.
You know that bones become soft when they are in men and in the first year of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated afterwards in nature due to the desiccation of their members.
When nature adjusts and covers over the broken bones of any part, it seems like glue that grows and stretches within that which is glued together, and which is conglutinated and liated, within which the fire of strength and firmness dwells, as if a fire at the beginning, within which no cause prohibits this from being one of its works.
For this reason, it is necessary to rest the thighs, thighs in which there is gravity and viscosity and heaviness, as they have said.
And you know that the types of fractures are different according to the members, and a fracture of the bone in the thigh is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the bone in the chest is different from a fracture of the two; and it seems that all other bones are different from each other.
And you remember the entire type of fracture, explained in the distinctive head of the other.
A different type of fracture can occur. And the types of fractures in their occurrences are different; for one is an arc fracture, another that happens in the stars; and some are fractures according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the pelvis and sternum and additics come and do not come, as it comes when prepared to write, and a fracture of the plague and disruption in the head, and a fissure small.
When in any case a certain part of the body is affected, it is necessary to restore it in the second position, recalling its distinct place in its respective locations.
The text describes a medical condition known as "motta" or "motional" which is caused by a fract The text then explains that the condition is recognized as a bone fracture: it is a twisting of the bone, and the pain is felt in the area where the break occurs, and it is noticed when you touch that part with your hand.
The text concludes that if there is no apparent twisting of the bone and no pain is felt when touching the bone during movement, then it is not a fracture.
The text suggests that it may be possible that the condition is a twisting or small fissure, but not necessarily a fracture if you do not feel pain when touching the bone with your hand and there is no compression of the entire area; there may be some pause over the location of the medications used at the time that reminds you of the moment that was appropriate for that place; and there may be a stricture subtle.
The text explains that you know that the location where it is curved and not divided into two or another if no accidents occur in its segment, as it is corrected completely from the whole part of its comparison, you cover that you come from your time to rectification of those that happen in postemia caut.
If the accident is an apoplexy, you should lay that part for several days after the apoplexy ceases; and if it does not improve, cut off that subsequent hand that you can lift and hold.
You know that the restoration and dressing of the wound depend on the bone from which the fracture occurred.
And apply that subsequent part that will be used for the rememoration of the wound.
If in the bone there are fractures, you must have an extension of this cut member, if it is the leg or the foot; or if the member is small, or a rope or a rope and the knee.
And if your position is in the place where you hold the member at the knee while the parts of the cut member are extended, you should know that you must return those hooks to their original position and to each part according to what can be placed there.
And guard that second point where you do not apply the force on the thigh for your operation of the bones or wounds; and know that the third power that you apply to one bone to another is better in other ways.
When it is advantageous for you to touch at that time with your hand, and if you sometimes find another cause, correct that and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
When there is a strong extension and compression, it is necessary to follow the advice of skilled doctors who perform operations on visible parts of the body, or perform contractions on the affected member as they have seen in the operation of their own hands.
The quality of the stricture of the member is that which you recommend; because you know that some members are differentiated in their appearance and size and form according to their kind.
When those who are small as the arm and elbow are, and they seem to be like those, it is necessary to cover the envelope with a fine silk cloth.
Those who have large thighs, such as the thigh or buttock, cover with a fine cloth to ensure that the envelope is tight and strong, connecting the large member to the entire part of the stricture, as there may be no space between them.
And then begin, placing your evacuation of equilibrium conveniently at that, pausing the limb over the location of that fracture am three or four times the envelope or member; and hold it tight with a small hand.
And then place your hand at that part of the departure from the location of the fracture, and hold it tight with a small hand that does not strain the stricture of the one you have strengthened at the location of the fracture. And then elongate your hand to the envelope of the location of the fracture a little, and gradually soften the stricture bit by bit, until you hold a large part in your hand.
Then take another knife and wrap the other vein around the location where you want to enclose it, and then see if the enclosures are at the end of the fracture; and your operation will be in the stricture of the enclosure and in the mollification of that second one that they have said in the first enclosure.
Then pause between the feathers of the lion's stop or dragon that has an engorged tortuosity of the fracture if in it there is a tortuosity; and otherwise, do not pause in it for any reason.
Then pause over the other knife, and engulf on those enclosures stellhas decently as much as possible, if in the location there is no inflammation or post-cautery, and you should pause over it that sede the post-cautery that will also cause the inflammation; and then let it alone for a while; and you should tighten on those stellhas.
And are the stellhas of the gut of the cane lady's race, and they should be formed correctly; or are of fust of pi; or of rams of palm; and is the width of each stellha according to this form and this figure:
However, cover the plate that is placed over that fracture with a thick one and a thin one like the others, and the length of the stela according to what is legible from the member's magnitude and appearance; and apply pressure on the plates as another bandage as your first stricture; and the lia descends gently as they have said about the stricture, and it is your stricture according to the location of the fracture, and as the fracture extends, the stricture becomes more severe.
When the sons are large and subtle, and many in number; and if the sons are large, then as you have seen in the operation of other wounds, when the strings of the tort are cut, and it is an error, when the stricture is not equal to the diameter.
For subtle sons are not convenient, and you will not agree to it for the stricture that you want, and it is not necessary that between each other there be a certain distance.
And if the thigh is cut at the extremities of the stones according to the stricture in those places, then pause there for a while, whether it is leopard's skin or lamb's wool that comes between, which does not cause injury.
Some visible fractures are in pain, and there are disruptions in the chain, and you will find in memory in that part of the capital second singularity.
And you know that the whole member is not straight when it is cut for the first time; the cause is that the member, when it is large, does not allow you to rest on the stones for at least four or seven days, according to your security of the appearance of gangrene.
This is the instrument used by ancients for treating fractures and dislocations, which they would place over the affected area.
A splint for treating fractures, convenient for complex and major fractures in the thighs and legs, where no heat or cold is felt: and that is made of powdered flour, and the marrow of the grain which you must consider the movement of the bone in the husks of the grain.
And comfort that support as it is, but not with those who are cruel to the skin, and pause the comfort of the thin or subtle one; and instead use that.
Another splint for treating fractures and dislocations: recipe of asafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of unguent, and migrach, which is made of millet grain salve, of all dracs x; of mirra and aloe of all dracs v; alochil of all dracs xx; all the parts and pieces and crumbs of water alichil or album of huou if the thigh complex is scalped; and use this splint, which has good composition and restores fractured bones gently, and confirms the homes.
1. Another application of warmth that soothes fractures and twists: recipe migach and apply a white ointment made with aloe and drac. x; with mire and drac. v; with acacia drac. vi; with arsenic ointment drac. xx.
1. All these are made in a mortar with motive oil, and they are crumbled, and they are mixed with water or albumin of egg or with alcohol and they are administered.
When treating joint pain and separating bones from their original locations, and addressing pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: hold the thread tightly and submerge it in warm oil and vinegar, and place it over the area.
This ointment is not useful for restoration, but rather for cauterization and expelling pain directly.
Another ointment for restoring cuts: use fresh willow bark needles and poppy seed salve; mix them all together and make the ointment.
A ointment for restoring bone fractures and when you want to resolve the aftermath of cauterization: mix aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of erica, all parts except the roots, and make them into balls; they should be soft and have a pleasant scent if the member does not become inflamed.
If the member becomes inflamed, use cool aloe water or water and apply to the affected area.
Another ointment for quick resolution that this first one does not have, when cauterization is severe and the member needs to be restored: mix aloe, linseed, balmroot, morsel, mint, violet flowers, camomile, all parts except the roots, and make them into balls; they should be soft and have a pleasant scent if the member does not become inflamed. The quality of the member and the color of the skin should determine which water to use for application.
May's Yopocras does not say that there is nothing to put on the member that needs restoration except wax and oil, and it recommends that it should be both larger and more delicate; and he says that it should be applied in this way.
It is said that in Gualia, there are points on the member that are used for restoration and the causes of which cause dryness in small amounts, similar to those causes that have been recommended.
A remedy to soothe wounds and alleviate pain: a mixture of honey, milk, hair of the sow or pennywort, and aloe vera, and salt divided into parts; it is applied and left to dry, and becomes a plaster.
The more the quantity follows the quality of the liquor that comes out and is considered if there is no pain, no excitement, and the bone is not broken, then the more it is useful in its place, you should not delay. And if pain or excitement or inflammation occurs at the site, you should apply or take it out in that hour, and remove the plaster from that part.
And take some ginger and wet seaweed, submerge it in water, and let it be in the water until the excitement and pain are calmed; and after that, massage the member for an hour; and then place something red over the wet skin under the water and oil, and put it on the member again after you are sure of not having a post-operative scar, and to reduce inflammation in the member, and to relieve the pain.
And you should repeat that subtle constriction, making it smaller and softer, and applying gentle pressure to the area where the initial injury was, and it will become healthier.
If at times the testicle and the scrotum swell, become inflamed, and experience pain and other accidents are common, and you are instructed to apply plaster and compression, then you should follow that approach as you have begun with the beginning of the engulfment.
If no harm comes to the member from any of those things that have been said, then you should not remove it for less than three days or four or seven; and some are completely healed in twenty days after you have removed it according to what has been told you by the dissolution of the member, as they have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles down to the coagulation of the flesh on that.
And you adjust the compression to the stricture that is less than your original stricture, and you relax in the engulfment of the patient's thighs, according to what follows the remorse of the member.
If at times the location of the fracture has dried and become less inflamed than before, then you should know that this nutrient is prohibited from reaching there; and therefore, after three days, you should broth the meat you have seen there, and the stricture will be small, and for this operation the member receives nutrients, and becomes cured.
When the fracture of another bone is not restored at the beginning, it is covered and then restored according to its tortuosity, which leads to error in the operation of those who do it, and great fear, and if they are true, the ankles become larger in their freedom and they feel aversion to that which has been done.
And I have not seen any of them do this, for it is reasonable that this does not work.
Chapter second: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
The kinds of fractures are breaks, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct. Four types of fractures are: one is caused by percussion of the skull, and the percussion comes from all the bones entering into the cranium, which we remove with forceps, as is done in the shoulder, and for this reason this kind is called excision; or the skull penetrates a part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh and does not pass through the penetration to the end of the bone; and this kind of fracture is called complete dislocation.
When the plague of these bone fractures is great or small, and those that are contractioned or atricated; and causes for their pain are burning or chilliness over the skin, and they appear to be so to them.
Is this fracture or one that has already penetrated into the condyle that was left of the bone; or is it in the face of the bone, and the pain of these bone fractures is great or small.
If this fracture is one that has been hidden in the bone, in the slightness of the small hair, and for that this special hidden fracture is called.
And this fracture is made by chilliness or by pressure on the skin, which causes any lamina of the bone to be inserted in the parts of the dintils at the concave location as they happened to the payroles of erams when they were struck and parted from their parts of the dintils.
And this is truly made in the bones of the human body, as it happens with the caps of eggs.
When all of these species of fractures are considered, they are considered as separate pieces like stelhas. And you will find all of this in its place.
And you will know all of these species of fracture by detection over those and by investigation of their tendons and cartilage that is over them.
And a specific capillary is known by what is discovered over the bones, and it is washed away, and it lines on the tendon, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fracture, the beginning of the accidents of the thigh is considered, and it is laboriously done if the accidents that signify by their significance are manifest on the body, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of the tooth, and sinus, and fever acute, and edema of the limbs, and symptoms similar to those of the accidents in the major parts, and its treatment is not cured.
And if sometimes non-corresponding accidents occur, you hope for health, then start the treatment of him.
The cause is that if you come to me with the disease as it is at the beginning and as it is in the days of winter, you will find that I study in the bone of the hip on the day twelvth hour total disposition.
If in the summer days, you cover the joints with cloth or bandages, keeping them on for seven days, knowing that the bones are becoming corrupted by the pannicol and that accidents may occur due to this.
If the fracture has already permeated the pannicol and covers the brain, and is divided into small and irregular parts, you should cover the infected and torn part with cloth, as you advise me to do.
If it is that your race has plague on the thighs, and you uncover the bones according to custom and with your hands as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be above the thigh.
If you happen to discover the bone, if there are clots or aphcema, then you should cover the area with what you have, and it is that you must compress the place where infusions of draps infused in vinegar and olive oil are placed, and when the aphcema is sedated, you should be sure of the flow of the sanc; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in the ablation of it.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And the second maneuver is that you insert the knife into the bone as straight as possible, and this is the form of it: And then administer another knife into this, a small push pin that is; and this is the form of it:
When administering the anesthesia, use the needle that corresponds to the second.
And you need several names of scalpels, of which some are sharp and others are not; and they should be thin and their edges should be sharp and pointy, and they can be made of iron or steel.
And use them easily by striking the scalpel with it, without hurting the head and leading to the edge.
If the bones are hard and strong, then use several needles that you insert into the circuit of the patient's body where you administer the anesthesia, which are called non-penetrating needles.
And they are not called quills but rather four points that do not touch the end of the bone as much as possible, so that the edge of the taravel is rounded or has a margin over it, which prevents being submerged and passing through the sponginess of the bone.
It is convenient that you take a large number of these needles, as many as are needed for the spine of each bone, taking into account that the extremity of the one that is sharp is the most acute, and the quantity in length and brevity is second to the quantity of the spiciness of this test.
This is the form of three kinds of teravels: The quality of piercing into the circuit of the cut bone is that you place the teravel on the bones and revolve it around those parts until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the teravel to another location, and pause there as much as possible within the entire amount of the thickness of the ring or around it.
And you insert the blade into that which is between every part of the bone, and make it subtle so that you can cut on its surface without lifting the blade, as they have said, when you have reached the bone, or your hand, or another cause for those parts which will appear at that point, as tweezers and fine forceps.
And be sure to guard the blade with all caution that it does not touch any cause of the cipher.
And when the blade has passed through the bone and is separated from the cipher if continued on it, and that is extracted, be sure to raise and close it in the roughness of the bone that is in the blade as another tool, but rather be careful not to make it too sharp as the other blades.
If you encounter any fragmentation of the small bones and joints, then take hold of that with ease as it is your duty to treat them; and then cure the pain in the limbs and find out which ones have been injured.
The other hand of the operation is longer, taking more time, which is praised by Guy de Champagne and is praised for its great skill; and this is the saying of the matter: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is strong and manifest, when you have discovered that part and have paused there at the extremity of this lent and gentle suture of which this is the form:
And it is that the lenticular part is like a lion and does not have any cause, and the sharp part is in two places at a distance, as sometimes; that the lenticular part should be adjusted to the cipher on the face of the sharp part in the bone.
And if you cut through the suture of a part that is small and has not been completely closed, and you are sure that no panicle will happen in this accident that you fear in this operation, and if the physician 14 was the fol of all men and their great ignorance, certainly, and if he was drunk.
When some cause is attached to the bone of the ankle in certain places of the bones, it will be found that this is due to the lenticular part of the gout, and it will be easier to remove it, as well as the other diseases and pains.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the ankle, and it is separated or remains on the bone, and there are sharp edges and subtle spurs on the face of the bone, it will be seen that those sharp edges and subtle spurs have been covered with razor-like sharpness by the preparations you have made for various quantities in order to be able to administer the correct amount of those at all locations, as well as the pus convenient for them and the pus second to that in which you left off after cutting the bone and the figure of the patient.
And cover that you administer in your reason with the one that covers the bones at the beginning with the purulent pus of those razor-like sharpness, and use as much of the subtle pus of the patient, and do not stop giving until you have given all the purulent pus of all those.
When in any of the other small hairline fractures and subtle fractures, follow the treatment that you have lost after correcting the position of the bone.
And it is because not all who have studied in that art are equally skilled. And it is based on that we have written that they have shown themselves in great fractures.
And if the tendon is tight when you reduce the bone, it is recommended that you take a piece of cloth of the same size as the amount of pus, and submerge it in warm olive oil, and place it over the orifice of the abscess; and take another piece of folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in warm olive oil and place it over the first piece of cloth and apply a pressure that does not harm the tendon, and administer to the cloth that is over the abscess and do not compress it only by the amount of pus you have.
And continue this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the healing of the cut; and then remove it and administer medicines that are superfluous in hydration, such as linen and flour of errors, powder of ensel and aristology, and similar substances like those.
It is necessary to make these powders of this kind that they are finely ground over the plague, as they are dry; and universally, they are administered in that entire medicine of which it is a property that it cleanses and does not irritate.
And keep in mind that the plague in your treatment is not clean; and it should not be in its surmise of engorgement nor another; nor should it add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and pours into it, and spreads over the thighs as this malignant malice.
And spreads over the philtrum of the head, as the bone of the skull is made rough by it when the cure of it is applied, and darkens on its surface; and therefore consider that if it spreads to the thighs those accidents that have been told you are true.
And if it does not darken black but from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that it darkens black, you should know that you take one part of honey and three parts of red oil, and apply those lines over the philtrum, and place that over the forehead; and cure that with the specials of the cure that are suitable when it is healthy.
I apologize, but the provided text does not contain a sentence
This line translates to: "Of the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
This line translates to: "You know that the nose is not cut, but rather it is made up of divided parts, such as one or more bones, with the part you have two osselets, and the cartilaginous part is not cut, and does not accrue, nor is it affected by atrophy and tortuosity and synovial fluid.
This line translates to: "If one of the parts of the nose is cut, you should know that you introduce the small instrument into the nose, and that it heals the fracture according to the indicated point, and according to the deformed part, and then it returns the nose to its natural figure. This line translates to: "And it is called so for your convenience, and remember that you do not cut for your own operation on the thighs.
This line translates to: "And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the dit does not pervade to that, you should know that it should be equal at the extremity of the ray where it is small.
If the fracture is in two parts, you should make it appear as if this were the case.
If you want to restore the bone in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, make sure to apply about one or two drops of olive oil to the area where the stitching was done.
And insert a mecatome in the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two clamps, if the fracture is in two parts, and use as many as necessary to fill the cavity of the nose.
And after the first restoration, if the clamps are wrapped in albumen and moved every day, without it being visible to me; having covered the meca with powdered plaster; and laying the bandage inside so that the bone is fixed and the cartilage is endurable.
And if some wounds are in the nose, instead of clamps, use a piece of leather that is wrapped in thread; and it should be that the fracture of the nose has been very severe and that the chest is not prohibited for inspiration.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, make incisions, and if you wish, make burns.
If another inflammation of the skin occurs after applying cauterization, apply a plaster made of the fat or fatty tissue of the thigh, or a poultice of the same color as the skin.
If there is no inflammation of the skin after applying cauterization, you should apply a paste made of flour and powdered eschscholzia to the affected area, and place a bandage over it, avoiding any cause of inflammation.
If the nose bones are broken or fractured, you should cut around them, extract them if possible, and then clean the area with instruments suitable for that; afterwards, close the wound with a plaster made of the same color as the skin, and care for it until it encrusts and solidifies.
If the nose becomes inflamed, you should clean it with saliva or warm water, and administer intravenous fluids if necessary to maintain its health.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
If the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, you should observe if the fracture is deformed only, and not split in two and curved at the corners of the teeth, then your diagnosis will be lighter.
When the fracture is in the lateral part of the leg, you should introduce the left indicum into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the medial part of the mandible, you should introduce the right indicum into the mouth of the patient; and push it gently to facilitate the reduction of the fracture, which will be easier in the adjacent part of the bone, in the other part of the bone of the adjacent segment; it will be equally to these.
If the mandible fracture has already been separated into halves, you should cover that you administer extensions of parts in a straight line, following the possibility of equalization.
If you happen to have a fracture of the teeth at disruption, you should tighten those that seem to be pulled by gold or silver wire or by alloy; and place your hand on the disrupted mandible, on the second part, on the lower lip, and on the large staple gently, or a needle of sole thread according to the length of the mandible, and according to what you have arranged for the reduction and that does not destroy.
When ordering the patient to rest and remain calm, and stop eating the food of the four seasons.
If you suspect that the figure has changed in any way, then you should cut and dissect it on the third day; and then correct this by comparing it to the original form of the body, using powder of moly, album of honey, or flour of cinnamon, which you would have kept as a sample of the body, and place it over the lion's fur.
And when you have attached and adjusted this plaster to the body, and the position of the bone is not changed, leave it, as long as it is healed and strengthens the fracture; four weeks later, this fracture is strained.
If another accident occurs after the cauterization, then you should administer the medication that has been given in the session of the patient as soon as it is healed, and it will be useful for that wound.
If the fracture is infected, then you should consider whether it is due to the separation of the bone or bones, and you should carefully separate those parts using that which is most suitable for the removal of those from the sturments.
If the orifice of the abscess is straight, you should enlarge it according to the quantity of your need, following the flesh.
When you have finished sewing those stitches, and if they do not cause much pain, then you can continue to perform the amputation if necessary; otherwise, stop and place your hand on one of the pressure points that correspond to that area and enter when it is healed.
Capitol v. (Latin) means "capital" or
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada (Latin) means "restoration of the shoulder when it is fractured." In English,
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en uma de tres manieyras (Latin) means "If the shoulder is twisted, the shoulder blade is torn from the bone, and this fracture occurs in one of three directions." In English,
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es separada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua (Latin) means "If the shoulder is torn, separated, or separated into two parts that do not cause pain, it is considered for restoration; or if it is injured in those areas and difficult to restore, or if the fracture is infected." In English,
In the operation in that case, when the fracture is discovered, it is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the assistant and follows the broken end, and the other extends the collar to that section.
When the fracture is located within the area that appears to be the form of the second part of the body, and it is not in the eminence or concavity, then engage it with care.
If you need extension, then cover the foot with a cloth or linen, and make it as large as possible according to the amount of your necessity; extend and raise the clavicle and straighten the shoulder, holding the fracture in place that covers it according to what has been said.
If you cannot extend the shoulder to the ends of the clavicle, then cover that which has been bent over the neck, and place it on the muscle of the foot with a cushion that is larger in size.
The surgeon presses the muscle of the foot on the parts that have been raised above the shoulder, and then corrects the fracture and holds it according to what has been said.
If you feel pain in the shoulder and muscles, then cover that area and remove those pains as much as possible for ease.
If it is held in the bone, then you must carve an incision in the flesh of one of the incisors that you have seen on this side, because you had stopped the tail of the sturment that serves the cipher; and the sturment is made of flint or iron, and this is the shape of it:
It seems like a blade of the kind that this is the concavity; and its length according to this is what you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
May the length of it be as you can according to your ability in the operation; that there may be ends attached as many times as possible, and one end may be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague that you have carved is wide when you have extracted the cartilage of the bone, and it is certain to be infected with cauterization, then you must adjust the lips of the plague according to the suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear cauterization, then you must fill the plague with cloths and powders according to the amount of the cut in the plague.
If you happen to have an abscess, you should inform the physician immediately, as it is often accompanied by redness and swelling in the affected area, and then stop the treatment.
And so, do not let the pelvis be out of place; and for this purpose, whenever you see the patient every day, when the limb is softened or the pelvis is already damaged, then you should correct this and tighten the ligament.
And then, stop the patient's sleeping on the chest, and stop there the thighs' titillation, and let the patient sleep in the bed with a small pillow; so that if that is elevated the helper of the patient from the neck of that, and thus the fracture of the shoulder is elevated to the muscle's elevation; or if the arm of the patient is at the chest of that.
And do not cut the ligament if it does not happen in the right or posterior compartment, enter within twelve days.
And if you have seen the face of the patient after the operation, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave when it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable after the twenty-eighth day, and some are watched in other men's time for that.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in Latin
This line translates to "On the restoration of a shoulder fracture." It seems to be a title or heading for the following
This line translates to "The spatula is cut at the location of the wound and not at the edges." It appears to be a instruction or guideline for a medical procedure.
This line translates to "And when the wound is cut — and it is cut at the deepest point — and not by touch, then follow the figure of the fractured bone with the preparation of the tool and reduce that figure to its natural form in the entire range of movement of the limb that you can possibly achieve." This seems to be a continuation of the instructions for treating a shoulder fracture.
This line translates to "And then cover the area with powder of almond oil and lemon; and then apply a drop of double-distilled water; and then cover the stem of the table with subtle silk according to the amount of the spatula or less." This seems to be a continuation of the instructions for treating a shoulder fracture, possibly related to applying a topical treatment.
This line translates to "If the stem is now concave in the corners of the spatula's wounds, then you should cut that concavity with lemon, and it may be possible to make the stem equal." This seems to be a continuation of the instructions for treating a shoulder fracture, possibly related to shaping the stem of the tool.
When it is necessary to apply pressure to the affected area, apply firm pressure with wet humors that are not too tight and do not cause pain in the joints.
Consider the limit in each day; and all watched that is softened, another watch and straighten the knee if it causes pain in the joints.
And wrap the thigh over the seat.
And the spoon is restored in 20 days or in .xxv.
When this number is completed, you dissolve the limit, and you know surely that it is of bones from which the beginning is not known nor their dissolution.
If you proceed to the location of the knee and clean the codon, then you dissect over it, take it out, and follow what has been said in the fracture of the sternum of the Achilles tendon caut if it happens here.
Chapter 7.
Of restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of the body and then bends in different directions; but the ends of the bones are always hard and not comminuted.
When the accident of the patient occurs when the thigh of the patient is cut, it descends to the parts of the fingers and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and much fever and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the cut bone and not concealed from the feeling.
The restoration of the leg is that it should be placed face down on the patient's back, and a cushion should be placed between the thighs of a cushion; and it is necessary to press the muscles of the leg, and adjust the costals of the leg as much as possible in the two costals, and subtly guide you in the operation of the leg and the equilibrium throughout the entire hand that can be used and that suits for this, until when the figure of the bone is restored to its original position.
When you have paused over the plaster and stopped, and paused over the table's subtle carving of ivory or silver and as it seems to levitate, push that away; and subtly place yourself on that over the cut bone that is not marred; and keep going with your hand along the ridge of the back, and tighten that stricture gently; and consider the plaster in total, and when it is softened, tighten that.
If necessary, cause some erosion or irritation, pain, or ecchymosis that occurs in that place, then cut and remove that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what happens due to the hand of treatment for the curative manieyra; and reduce the plaster, if sometimes it is the face; and adjust the stricture within when it is healthy.
Capitulum VIII.
Of the restoration of the ribs when they are twisted.
You know that a rib fracture does not happen except in large locations that the two sides hit, and from the ends of them in the part where none of those contractions occur but rather by those cartilages. I recognize that the matter is not avoided due to the desire of the physician for the patient.
The restoration is made as soon as the fracture is closed by the physician according to the most possible method, but if it is not closed according to the least, and the broken bone is pressed and held firmly with plaster and bandages, then it is indicated for that.
And if the rib fracture is declining to the parts of the dentaries, you should go to the buttocks with severe pain and puncture, as if you had punctured someone else, and for that reason to pull the glove; and you should go through this difficulty of anus, stomach, and vomiting of the mouth; and this is difficult to cure.
And already the antics were invented in that time for the purpose of preventing vomiting.
And of their saying: that you should pause the walks of the thighs which generate inflammation and distension, because the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pressed to the parts devoted.
When we have not caused this for something that would generate apoplexy, and if it has already happened, then help with this.
They closed the wound with a bandage that was not too tight and, as it seemed reasonable, but nevertheless feared that the wind would drive the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
They closed the wound with a bandage that was not too tight and, as it seemed reasonable, but nevertheless feared that the wind would drive the superfluities to the place due to weakness. They filled the cavity with lint that had been soaked in olive oil, and placed a bandage over it, making sure that the wound was not open when they removed it for the second time; and they treated the thigh with care, both for food and medicine.
If the thigh is very painful and does not suffer, and the doctor punctures the membrane with a needle, they fear for the thigh, and they cover the wound with a bandage, discover the edge of the costa, and place the instrument on the membrane that preserves the cipher, the rememoration of which is preceded, and they extract the oils that are easily extracted, and take out the wound.
When it comes to adjusting the mouth of the plague, if it is large, use a poultice made of ointment and apply it within the mouth once it has healed.
If you have an abscess on the hand, then cut off the pus and sprinkle pulverized red ochre on it, and hold it over the wound to treat the abscess.
If you are bitten by a snake on the leg, once it has healed, then enter the poisonous substance and treat the wound.
Capitol, Chapter 9.
Of the restoration of spinal fractures of the two and the neck.
Sometimes there are fractures of the bones of the neck, and they appear to be in the trapezius muscle, and seem to be in the spine of the back. And when you want to know if it will be cured or not, consider whether the bones are still hard and stiff and dead and cannot be moved, extended, or stretched, and when you compress them with your fingers or puncture them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in the months of dispositions it is mortal.
If any pain is felt in those and the parts where the teeth are and points are made, you should know that the nail of the bone is saved and that the thigh is rarely affected by inflammation.
If you see the spines of the back and want to know if they are healthy or not, consider the feet of the patient.
If you see that they are already softened, go to those who are affected in the most painful parts, and when you lie on your side, notice that some parts are retracted over the pubic bone and cannot urinate, you should know that it is fatal and not to be treated by a doctor.
If you do not find any cause for those, the cause is better and there is less pain.
And the treatment of the patient is that you pierce at the seat of the acupuncture point that you place over the spine that is red or has mucus, or as if it were sedated; lie on that one and notice some parts enter when the acupuncture point is sated.
When you stop one of the comforting and enduring ointments and apply it to that part; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where the pain is most intense until it is cured.
If you accidentally cut the bone of the hip or any other separated part, cover that wound with a cloth and keep it there; then adjust the corners of the wound with a sutura if it is large; and then care for that am alcu encarnatiu of the enguentz, until it is cured.
If the bone of the hip is split and the end of the femur is exposed, cover that wound with a piece of cloth from the other thigh and tie it around; then apply the ointment and bandage, as instructed by the doctor, and hold it in place.
If you feel the hip bone is split, cover that wound with a piece of cloth and remove it, and care for the wound until the cure preceded by the doctor is cured.
Capitol is not a standard medical term in Latin, It
De restauracio de la ancha translates to "restoration of the wide" in English
The bones of the thighs are so thin, and if they break, their fracture is not simply a communication at the extremities but is inscribed in the longitudinal and declinate parts of the dentition; and it causes pain in the thigh and puncture, and the camba is stunned when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of the wide is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture, which is the figure of the wedge.
And if the fracture is at the end of the thigh only, then you should cut it off secondly, as it is apparent to you by equality cutting that which is assembled according to its natural figure.
If the fracture is in the long or if it has declined to the parts of the dentition, then you should place your hand on the patient's abdomen over which you have prepared the restoration of that fracture. And when you have cut it off, place your hand on the plaster, and pause over that support of lead or chain, and press firmly on the part where you are not afraid of puncture of the fracture or movement of the stump.
When the patient lies down on their side or stomach, command them to lie down on their side or stomach.
If you encounter an asthma attack, stop extending the chest and its restoration as soon as the asthma attack is sedated, and place your hand on the side that was previously pressed; then return to the restoration of the chest, and stretch that arm as much as possible.
And if you encounter broken or cracked bones, then treat them.
Chapter 11.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the helper.
The helper is that which is between the thigh and the shoulder cap of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of the helper is in one of two hands, of which the one that you hold is the one that should be pressed firmly according to this form:
They are connected by two tendons, and they should be suspended from the raised location.
You should follow the thigh over a pillow; and then let go of the extended arm that has been placed on the inside of the joint, which comes out at the ankle of the limb where the curve of the bone is attached.
And suspend it over that heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the adjacent parts; and the surgeon and the fracture of the bones more severe, within which the fracture returns as soon as it is covered.
And the other hand is that the pillow should be pressed against the cervical spine and suspend the collar of the neck; and command two ministers to hold it so that the fracture of the bones is covered by one, and the other holds the other end of the limb; and they extend their part.
And if you want the extension to be strong, hold firmly on the fracture of the limb and on the other limb, and let the two surgeons extend their parts.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, hold that the extension of the limb is placed on the hip and the other part of the fracture is held by the hand.
When it appears that the fracture is at the knee, then you should place a pad under the limb over that spot and that leg.
When you open that ease and work on it, and as much as you can open it afterward, without causing any harm, and apply it well, you will find that the cautery does not cause any pain.
If you do not have pain from the cautery, you will loosen the suture in the seventh day, and place something over the wet and red part that appears after the cessation of the pain, and you will hold it tight.
And the tool for tightening that is placed over the fracture is plaster, and it is placed over it in an enveloping way with a cloth; and you adjust the arm over that helper, and place your hand over the affected muscle.
And place the cloth and tighten over the helper arm so that the arm is in place of the splint, if not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
And you use a splint.
And you place the splint over the fracture that is pushed in and pushed firmly by the other splints; and it is placed between each splint the latitude of the point, and the longitude of the splints according to the fracture added by three points of the total part.
And then apply pressure over the bones with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your stricture at the site of the fracture must be tight. And when the fracture is aligned, the stricture becomes smaller.
And if you sometimes notice the situation of the bones and the stricture as they have said in the hour when you restore the member to its natural position, then you do.
And if you fear anphylaxis, apply the stricture and bones enter the day after as they have said.
And after three days consider the liament in all parts, and if there is no inflammation or swelling, or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to superfluous stricture, then correct everything according to what has been said.
If you are concerned that no cause has been found for this, do not delay the application of the plaster for at least three days or more.
And is that his sleep on the back is over the member's head, and the rest of the body is over the stomach.
And pause upon the assistant's full belly of wool, and consider in total or partial daytime or night that no figure of the cut member is delirious or dissolved, or that the limb is softened, therefore correct everything as much as your virtue allows.
And pause the diet of the patient according to the order that has been given, namely that the diet is subtle at the beginning and becomes denser as it progresses; and you should cover the diet of the patient.
Four days of the assistant and the patient's constipation are common, and you should cover that they are loosened and administered with food and medicine to those who correct the latter.
And if the fracture is layha atrita, you should not take out the pins or staples within a day or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is made of two bones which are called the humerus; of these, one is small and is that which is located at the top, and the other is large and is that which is located at the end of the small one.
And if the larger humerus is cut only slightly, or the smaller one, and very few are cut.
And when the smaller humerus is cut, you restore the fracture of the elbow and the surgery of the elbow is also placed in the same position.
When the bone of the foot is broken and the treatment is difficult.
It is worse when bones are broken.
If the small toe is broken, it is convenient for the doctor to apply a splint, and then restore the position of the bone, which is easier to extend with the foot open.
If the large toe is broken, it is necessary to apply a strong stretch.
And if both toes are broken, you should apply a strong pull.
And you should apply the restoration of the foot and the extended stretch over a cushion, with the fingers on the parts that are not covered by the other parts, as all others say, and the ear is placed below the other parts, and the ankle is supported on a flat board.
And if a cushion is placed under the foot in the arch or heel of the foot, so that the ankle does not press against it.
And the surgeon extends the arm of the part that is pushed away from the shoulder or elbow, and another surgeon does the same.
When the physician examines the joint, he should open it as much as possible, choosing the best figure that can be.
If in the facture of the bone there are sharp edges, then you should carefully cut off all the piece in the desired location to maintain your virtue.
If in the separated part of the bone there is a cut through the tendon and it is not as expected for the restoration of the bone, then you should apply to it and leave that second hand with which they have told you to do so.
If the fracture is in pain, and I have already made this capital single case, then take the cauterization of that.
If you encounter an apothem at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and it should be more precise and subtle than the previous ones, and press the cloth on that subtle opening when the apothem is about to come out; and take the wax and pause the prepared powder of clay earth, and then stop the sticks; and that stick should be placed over the fractured part with a little bit of red and strong.
You already know that the number of stars in the arm you saw in the major positions, or is it a fracture in a single bone or in two bones?
Then stop the stricture on the location of the fracture with firm pressure, and when fewer parts of the fracture or lower parts are being extirpated, stop the stricture as soon as possible after the rememoration of the patient at the beginning of the capitol.
The dressings that encircle the fracture are very humid, not hard or sharp, and the one that is most suitable for it is of a subtle and gross nature, as has been recommended.
Consider the member and the limb for the appropriate number of days. And if any cause occurs that requires rectification, act as promptly as possible with the cause that occurs in the member, and cover the member with water to keep it moist until the end of that impulse.
And do not let the member contract after the pause, and return the stricture.
If the extension has already been softened and the bone has been made stronger and seems to be in line with those, then you should straighten everything as much as possible with your own virtue.
E considera mays if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to superfluity of stricture, then you should know that this member becomes soft and less resistant over time as the nutrient runs to it, and strengthens it.
E if there is no cause for those that have been said to happen in the thighs, then you should not know that it has slid within the next twenty days or around those.
And if you hang the thigh up by its own virtue of movement, and make it sleep on the soft pillow.
You know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or sixty-two days, or twenty-eight days, and then it follows the order of the complexes and the order of virtue.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the thigh and of the fingers.
You should know that at the base of the neck and among the bones of the skull, and not happen to them except visible movements.
And when fracture or dislocation occurs in the neck, you should cover the bad with a cloth and press on it with your hand, and then hold the head over that extended area.
And if the extension extends the bones, then place the knife on those parts that are not hard.
And you should cover that with plaster and stop it if there is no attack of gout; and then hold it over the area according to its quantity, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
If the fracture is in the parts of the fingers, then make it seem like a hope for cloth, and command the head to hold that with its hand, and make it stronger than the cloth.
And is the case that the cloth is held by the hand, because the hand is applied to the finger; and hold it according to what you cover.
If the fracture is in the wrong part, then you must cover that part with a pillow and another pillow on top of it to make it wider and more comfortable; and place a bandage around it, as it is rolled up between the two limbs.
If you happen to break a tooth of the teeth, then cover it with a piece of cloth and secure it with a thread as much as possible, and if it is necessary, place a small pillow under it so that the fracture is elevated and not painful.
If the fracture is in other parts of the body, such as the neck, ear, or anus, then cover it with a piece of cloth and secure it as much as possible, or tie it together with a thread, as they say in the case of the pillow. Or place a small pillow over it, as they have said in the case of the pillow.
And consider, in your restoration, and that is, the arrangement of apposition and opposition of the cautery — as I have said in the second operation — that it covers when any cause occurs of those, according to what is told in the story of the cautery.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided does not contain a
The translation of "De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa" is "Of the restoration of a bone fracture of the
The translation of "Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana" is:
The restoration of the part is made as follows: one bandage is placed over the fracture and another bandage further down the fracture, and the thigh is laid down on the patient's belly and face.
The surgeon extends the bandage as much as possible according to the quality of the bone in the location of the fracture.
If it is necessary to straighten the knee, then the bandage should be placed at the knee joint, and the other bandage should be placed further down the fracture, so that the extension catches on, and the other bandage covers the fracture.
If the fracture is directly above the ankle, then the bandage should be placed at the ankle joint, and the extension should be made at the other parts.
And the surgeon should align the bone as much as possible with the larger parts, reducing the fracture according to the similarities and the bone is conjoined by good union; then cover the joints and strictures, if not causing damage to the member. If damage occurs to the member, then you should treat it for several days until the apostematous part is loose, and return to your usual care.
The stricture of the patient's injury is that a hard bend covers the fracture, doubles over its two or three veins, and remains due to the superfluity; and it envelops the cavity within which the blood and the flesh of the thigh and leg are located.
E introduce long and narrow wire between the thigh and the cavity of the denol at the parts where the ends are located, and bring out the ends of the wire from the opposite side, and rotate it over the cavity and the thigh as much as necessary due to the superfluity of the bend.
E place your hand over the thigh at the location of that astelhas fracture, and place a stone over the bones of the cavity.
E fill the spaces between the cavity and the thigh with cloths many, so that the stricture is coagulated.
E begin the stricture with a hard bandage over the location of the fracture in three or four folds, and as you remove the bandage from the location of the fracture, your stricture will be smaller and less tight, and it will be easier to remove.
And extend the ends of the intestine to the parts that come in front of the cavity of the foot, and tighten the ends of the other part so that the limb is not loose in its place.
And apply the structure over that, so that it does not cause inflammation in the limb or tendon rupture, or emflacio and similar symptoms for those; and if it causes any of those causes, then cut me a piece from it, and correct what has happened totally, according to what has been said by the doctors.
If in the bone there is pain in that which holds it together, then you understand that this second one is possible for you; otherwise, cover that part with something and let it remain there, and cure what comes after the rememoration when it is healed.
And if some ways are tightened this fracture of the thigh or another that is adjusted to those bones, then as has been said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of that, it does not cause claudication in the thigh; and if it is restored alone or another is applied to the other part, then you must have claudication in that which has been stretched.
You must know that the thigh is tight for fourteen days or a few months, and this depends entirely on the variety of the compositions and other dispositions.
I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not
I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide
I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
When considering all the dispositions that have been recommended for other fractures, it is important to remember that cauterization is often used and should be done in a similar manner as this one, which is convenient if it is beneficial for the patient's health.
I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba" translates to "Restoration of the fracture of the pelvis
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil." translates to "You know that in the pelvis there are two bones of which one is large and is named after the pelvis itself; and the other is thin and is named 'girdle'.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aqo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una." translates to "And when fractures occur in the species of the bones that occur in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason a restoration is made of the affected part as in the restoration of the arm engagement, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas." translates to "And if the three bones are twisted, the pelvis is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant." translates to "And if the small bone is twisted, the pelvis is converted into the parts of Denant.
If the hip bones are twisted, that part will be affected, and it is one of those causes that you have not yet noticed.
And properly administer extension, stability, and ligamentous support according to that injury.
However, if the fracture of the femur is not accompanied by movements of agony, then extension should be more forceful and lesser leverage, and it will be better for your virtue.
And if there is any cause for operation on the shoulder, and it happens when you dislocate the bones and that complicates the entire operation, then you will take iron nails of the quality that are placed in front of those causes that are placed in front of them, and so their edges are branched; alleviate those for those that have a slight rash, and do not be afraid of the hands, and it should be as long as the length of the shoulder, and the denol should enter into the joint.
And if you wrap around each layer according to the length of the bone, and place one on the part of the femur of one side and the other on the other side, and they are the denol entering into the joint below the foot.
If you have the forceps in three locations on the extremities and at the middle location, then this structure is forbidden by clinical practice on both sides of the face, and it is for good reason.
And an injection of lead has already been given according to the length of the chamber; and it is placed in the chamber by itself, which preserves that of movement.
And above all, do not make this on fracture, and when it truly happens.
And consider the chamber in every day and study that for its better understanding, and you guard it from apostema and inflammation or other causes seeming; and when any cause of those occurs, you should stop what you are doing as soon as possible that it may be cured.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Not all ankle fractures occur; fewer foot bone fractures occur, and toes do not often fracture, but only twist.
If the bones of the foot are broken and sometimes these bones are raised above each other, then the foot's joint should be paused on the prepared earth as is customary.
Then place the other foot on the earth that is raised over those bones, and sharpen those, and pull them in order to turn them within their sockets.
Then place a plaster and stop on the foot, and place on the belly of the foot a small table with two plates.
Then tighten that around the foot with the structure in place, as you have enveloped it with wraps and other causes of which it indicates.
And when they have passed three days or four, you will remove the plaster, and then you will find the bones engaged, whether they are crushed, dislocated, or in their place, and the operation will be done on them with caution.
If they are found to be dislocated, you will restore them, and pull them back in the same way as I have advised you in the restoration of those that were dislocated. And then pause the second part of this line after the length of this one, and put a little of this on it; and then the foot of this table that you have recommended to you, and tighten that in a proper way.
If it is that the bones are two or three or more, then you must pause on each part of the table according to its quantity wrapped in a leopard skin, and tighten the table on the base of the foot, and be stationary over one of the caps of the table for the stomach of the foot so that it holds well.
And it is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes that they have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that they have said; and pause until you have completely recovered from this one that is causing you pain.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hip bone and the penile bone and the thigh bone of the man.
When the hip bone of the woman is fractured, then make that cut in that direction, and then lean it on the other side a little, and hold it behind.
When the midwife cuts the cord, and it is placed in the child's mouth as expected; and when the woman is cut, and her back is lifted up, little by little, until all of this is forgotten inside where the part of the cord that was supposed to be in the child's mouth is, and the thigh returns to its original position.
Then place powder on the back of the child, and when you want to urinate, make the cord easier and then urinate, and reduce and return that second pillow to the hand that was first placed there, and return the first powder pillow.
And keep the child's bottom clean for seven days or until it is restored.
If you want, take once a gauze and press on the anus of the child with a cannula of wax; and enter the entire bag into the child's womb, and inflate it as much as possible inside where the bag returns to its original position when the vesica is inflated by the womb.
And make sure it is filled with cord and stay for several days after they have recommended it, until it is healthy.
When the bones of a man or woman are split, administer treatment and apply the water that has been recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that water is not hidden in these immediate fractures and does not end, mainly because of the one to which you refer and study; four, that fracture means to you in the largest possible way in restoration and in stricture of the bone, and therefore understand it.
In the genitals of a man when they are split, take guarguamela from any place, and put the genitals in that; and place a bandage over the surrounding skin, and wrap it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be cured.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are plagued.
It is convenient for that to which the fracture has occurred, and mainly if the bones are large as those of the thigh or of the supporter, or seem to be that, which you cut and suture as much as those conditions of sutures allow at you or testify similar as they have said.
If the plague flows out, you should cover yourself with the retention of the dust that you sprinkle over the affected area, if there is no other cause present.
And then begins to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong this, if there is no stroke.
If there is a stroke, you should continue the restoration of the fracture within the nine days, within which the stroke allows, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause other accidents.
If the bone protrudes above the abdominal wall, you should cover that and cut it to reduce it and open it as much as possible with ease and little extension.
If extension is not prepared and the force of the limb is greater than the strength of your muscles, you should reduce that as much as possible with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers, and its latitude is according to the amount of the plague; and for this the surgeon must take from those three or four according to the amount you indicate in the treatment throughout the type of fracture.
When making an incision, and there is little resistance so that it does not need to be bent at that time during the operation.
And it should be sharp at the end that is marked in the outer edges; and it should be the desus of the leg, and the maytat of the leg goes into the parts.
This is the form of it:
It is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small palette.
Because the end of it should be raised above the end of the prominent bone.
And press that in a vein that returns the bone, and it should be tied at any equacio.
And then try to tie the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it is cut, and not pregnant with the sturment for good exception, you should know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside that instrument has power to do this.
If you cannot reduce the bone of all as much as they have recommended, then insert it inside that as much as you can that covers from those inscizoris which have said; or sharpen that am a little with one of the serras in any manieyra as possible.
And so much to that which is Roman in the bones and sharp spurs.
When the bone is reduced, and the reduction of the leg causes great pain, you should know that the bone will not return to its natural position; and then do as you have done for the leg, but make it larger in size.
When you have completed your restoration of the bone that you made for the leg, and you submerge the drape in black sterile ointment, and if it is summer, and you do not remain on the plague or any other cause from which it may arise, so that it will not add to inflammation and decay.
And provide support in the hour of the highest complement of the bone restoration, and discover the plague that has been discovered, which has been infected by the wound and used according to the quantity of the plague.
And keep all caution not to strain the plague at the fracture, where no more than five motas can be made by the doctors, and do not add to the death or decay of the bones, so it is sinful. And if the second stricture is shorter, softer, and different from the strictures of other fractures.
If the plague is large or malignant, and one fears that bad accidents have occurred, and pain occurs in that area, then doctors do not cover that parts with clothing, less because of those hard sheets in the place of sticks and to tighten them more.
When the plague has already started to appear, that is, if it has been born from a wound, then you should keep the cloth that was previously placed over it, and apply calicines, which are our customary remedies for plagues, as we find tetrafarmacons and similar things like this.
It is advisable to you that you peel the limb and consider the plague in every day and evening that it is consolidated and closed, and cover that member so that it is prepared in such a way that the scarring runs from the part to the parts that are easy to reach.
If to the plague pass days and it is not consolidated nor separated from the wound, then you should know that here are small parts where you should cover the plague to prevent it from being touched by chance. When dealing with those that are separated and do not separate, those that do not separate and pull the member causing pain, then insert your hand there where you can easily insert it.
If you encounter the plague or inflammation, it is a sign of something else, another form of corruption and putrefaction, then cover that with what is convenient for you to use in the care of that which precedes the following account in the upper part of the book.
And from that which covers you, make sure your speech is suitable and present your hand: when it grows large, raise it above the member as if it were the thigh and the helper, and seeming like those of the large members, and do not presume to attract or extract, nor the extraction of it that many swells occur due to this for about 20 or 30 days; and take care of the plague if you see it, and if not, lay it.
Chapter 20.
Of the care of node that occurs in the dressing of any fracture.
When visible motions occur in this node of the surgical treatment of fracture, and especially when it relates to joints, and is observed through the figure of the member; and therefore, it strongly prohibits the member from its natural operation.
It is considered if the node is recent and administered in those medicines that have stitched aloe, essential oil, and myrrh, and camphor, and semblance of those; and it is not necessary to take from any of them, or all of them, or some of them, according to what you have stitched with aloe, essential oil, or album of honey, or agreeable oil, and then place those over the node in stopping, and bind those over it for good constraint.
And the excision that does not cut through that per day; and if it does cut through that, then do so again, until it is re-flattened; or stretch over that lamina of plomo descentment, four plomo has property of remaining totally that which is inflamed in the members.
If the node has already been converted into stone and is being stretched and it causes the star of that coitament, then cut through that per the part of the pus raised of it, and insert the superfluity and eminent, or ratz that member rezoris if it is re-flattened; and cure that within if it is healthy.
I apologize, but the provided text is not in Latin, It
When restoring a fracture, if it is restored and follows the natural direction of the bone, it is properly called a "restoration" by doctors.
When a bone fracture is restored, and if the subtle member and limb are moved slightly, then nothing is achieved except by causes that are not: of which one is a multitude of solutions for the limb and the ligamentation of the pain does not follow that it covers; or by superfluity of stricture of the ligaments within which nutrients are prohibited from reaching the member; or by superfluity of embrocation; or by movement that is excessive at its time; or by lack of sanctification in the body of the patient and debauchery of it.
And the cure for this is to give massage to the patient and make them breathe deeply, and enter a warm bath and wet their clothes and let them dry over the patient.
And then return the bandage to the member, so that the bandage attracts the necessary nutrients, or continue embrocation of the wet water, within which the nutrient flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
Regarding the cure of the three-knuckle bones when they are restored incorrectly and it is forbidden to operate on them, as it covers.
When the member that has been restored is under the care of the sanatorium for its tortuosity and eminence at the third metatarsal and nodality, and it is formed in the form of the member, but the member is not prohibited from the natural operation of the foot, it does not cover that you receive the word of that which exists in that member is a new tritone.
Many have already performed these operations on many patients, and this operation is often feared by those who perform it, as the one who performs it is mortal.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, it is likely that they are caused by water in the one who has them, as the ones who have them are swollen like the feet of those who have had an operation on the legs, and resemble those; and it should be applied to the member a plaster that is made of mollification, as if it were painted with oil or ointment, and it should be placed on the member; or if it is grease from the feet and it is mixed with wool or gray or olive oil, and it is applied to the member; or if they are greasy figs and they are tied with the fingers of the hand, and they resemble those of the medicines that are used for consolidation.
When some women are dissolved by frequent rubbing of the drier that is on the most humid parts, and it is administered to the member in all parts during all hours.
If the tortuosity has already been anointed and becomes hard and converted into stone and necessity arises for surgery of the patient's leg, then you should cover that the pus is below the cecum and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it should be known that this is superfluous nodation of those metals in the bones that have been incised subtly, and there should be facilitated care in that part of the patient's solicitude and study.
Capitol, Chapter XXIII.
On the speech on displacement.
Dislocation is a separation of one of the joints of the upper limb, which prohibits movement and forces the figure of the member to be over the thigh, causing great pain and injuries.
When you encounter an accident of dislocation, you should perforate as much as possible to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes necrotic and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And you should not cover it with anything but in the moment of the aspiration, for motas that are visible bring on spasms and painful sensations.
When this happens, you should know that you are performing the labiotomy on the thigh, and then place your finger inside where the incision was made; and then the member should be embrocated with warm ointment and ointment, and then it should be reduced for ease.
When each member is treated with care, the reminder will come to its place.
When I have already ordered the capsules of dislocation according to what precedes in fracture, from the beginning of the swollen part it goes to the end of the swollen part.
Capitol 24.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
If the jaws are not tightened, and the dislocation of the teeth is caused by two causes: either they are loose in their sockets due to little removal, and are then softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and compressed, entering that they are softened at the joint between the foot and the tongue, which does not hold its mouth and does not clench its tongue, and the tongue is wrapped in the gullet.
When the dislocation of the jaw is slight, it usually returns to its original position for no reason.
When the dislocation is complete and compressed, you should make sure that the reduction of the jaw is given as soon as possible, and it should not be delayed for too long.
This line translates to: "And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and enters the doctor's hand into the mouth of the patient, either in the jaw where the dislocation of the mandible is located, if it is in one part; or if the doctor enters both hands into the mouth, if the dislocation is in multiple parts, and the others say that the jaw is deformed from those that engage; and commands the patient to stop using their jaws and release those from each part; and the doctor removes the jaw and cleans the jaw before returning it to its original location.
If it is difficult to reduce the joint, and especially if the mandibles are dislocated, you should administer eyewash with water and oil, and if the reduction of the mandibles is painful, do not delay the reduction of the other joints, as they have said.
And when they return and close the patient's mouth and do not bite it, you should place your hands over those powders of drap, and use wax and rose-colored oil; and you will find that it is easier to pull out the teeth.
And if the patient's head is on the table, and his chin is between two handles, so that he does not bite his lips at the end or on the left; and you do not force any cause; if the table is a leopard's skin, then when the pain becomes more intense and the mandibles are notched, you should push it with your hand.
And it will be administered easily, and you should not work on the swelling of the mouth, but rather on the food and bile and excretion, if the mandible is notched and healthy.
If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not converted to their proper places, then one should make frequent observations of the fevers and daily showers, and the stomach of the patient will often become irritated, and the patient will often vomit bile.
When you see this, you will know that it is lost; and observations made daily will show you the one to which this happened in X days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder girdle and the end of the muscle.
The shoulder girdle is not dislocated from the latissimus dorsi by its continuity to the chest; and some are dislocated at their proper place, and that is declared by the feeling.
And the restoration of the patient is that he lies on his side with his knees extended and his feet touching the ground. And make sure to cover the area with your palm with strong pressure, so that it returns.
And place your hand over the plaster and powder and press hard on that.
When the end of that which is inserted into the thigh is not continuous, it should not be dislocated on any day; you should reduce and grip it according to what has been said and what you have appeared to understand.
And then pause over that plaster, powder, and extraction, and command the patient to adhere to the tightness and the reparation within which it is cured.
And when this curative measure is reduced, the end of the muscle is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
Of the reduction of the displacement of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except for three ways, of which one is dislocated from the beginning of the tibia to the end.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the muscle, and it is made hard; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the bottom parts by the nerves.
And it is most dislocated and deformed and is pushed to the end parts of the tibia, and most in those where the bones are few, it is dislocated; less in those where the bones are many, it is pushed out with difficulty.
When many people experience pain in the body due to hitting or pressing, and the muscles of the body become inflamed due to cauterization, it is already known that this has occurred.
When you arrive at the patient's side, you should enter quickly and proceed with the treatment of the patient.
It is known when the dislocation occurs when you feel the pain in the joints; therefore, you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the surrounding muscles, and then between the different manifestations of the dislocated muscle; and you should touch the head of the concave muscle and the surrounding muscles, and in the thigh, it cannot be reduced to the knee joint, nor can it be maintained for all movements.
If the dislocation is painful, you must apply pressure to the joint and touch the muscles with your hand, and do not be afraid.
And this dislocation is reduced slightly when it is fresh and the thigh is relaxed.
The reduction of the dislocation is that the master lifts the leg of the patient to the sides; and he places his hand on the titillated part of the joint, and he raises the joint with strength in its new location, and the master lifts the leg of the patient, and extends it there; and he pauses it so that it returns slightly.
If the pain does not return after a certain period of time and it is due to dislocation, then days should pass, and the leg should be covered with a damp cloth and massaged with oils that are mollifying and linimentic such as rose oil, fenugreek, and millet, and the pain should be administered.
And if the thigh is flexed on the patient's shoulder and is held in place by the expectation of wool that is between tightness and stricture, and if the doctor places the thigh on the table and raises the head of the muscle that is vertuous, and pulls the pain of the thigh towards the points that are outside, and another servant holds the head of the thigh, so that it is not uncomfortable for the points that are outside, then until that returns to its original position.
And if you want, reduce that second maneuver: and it is that you are making present a man who has a long leg, and is from the side of that thigh, and enters the shoulder muscle into the expectation of the thigh and raises the expectation of the thigh to the parts outside as soon as the thigh is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the pain of the thigh away from the points outside of the abdomen. When the patient's thigh is injured, you should cover it with something that is lighter than another cause, so that it does not cause more pain, and the dislocation returns as much as possible.
When the joint is reduced by another hand: and it remains in the ground a long rod of the head of which is of human figure, like a pillow of mortar, which is not thick nor subtle, and is placed next to the thigh; push that the reduction is over the head of the rod, and the thigh is standing second according to the length of the rod, and extend the hand of you to the parts on the other side; and extend the body of you from the other part for strength, that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
If the reduction is difficult due to all the causes that have been said, use this treatment: and it is that you hold a rod of the quantity that is in the long of two bars, and the latitude of which is four degrees, and the largest part of it is released in the preon of the tittilic according to this form.
And place a pillow of rods on the head that the rod does not press the thigh.
And place the reduction next to the thigh and extend the hand or arm over the rod into the parts on the other side, and see the rod over the assistant and the hand and the end of the hand.
And then, place your arm on a scale according to the latitude, and the other end should be extended to the parts behind, and the other part should be suspended from the other side, so that the joint does not move too much.
And when the joint is complete according to your ability, and you notice that you have pauses on the opposite side of the titillate spur of wool; and then apply a plaster made of powder of honey and almond oil over all the muscle, so that it does not roll back, and strengthen the titillate with stricture decent; and the limb is rolled over the plaster, and the part of you is connected to the collar of you, and it is less, and not bad for seven days.
And if the food of the patient is little, then enter that member is comfortable, so that you can push it to the sanctuary of you.
And if the food is given more in seven or eight days, or if it is exercised with a movement; and then if it stops and does not soften, you are already cured.
If the joint is dislocated and moves unsteadily due to moisture that occurs in it or another cause, then you should know that three points are needed to be administered with cauterization, as it is said in the capital of cauterization.
If everything is done and it takes about three days for the joint to loosen and not tighten, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some parts, and it cannot be raised to the part that is tightened, then you should know that those nerves of the patient, which are at the top of the muscle, have already been cut or extended or made smooth, and you should know that the joint will not stay in its place for long.
For the dislocation of that which is caused, you need the chest and breast or the parts behind it, and the reduction is made by pulling and extending it as much as possible, until it returns.
And if another stricture is administered in that place and cures it within the time it is healed.
And if gravity occurs in the member and slowness in the movement of it, then you should use the thighs and legs when that gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for "Capitol
This line seems to be in Latin and can be translated as "Treatment of hip dislocation." In medieval medical texts, "cur
This line seems to be in Latin and can be translated as "You should know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and when it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in the front and rear parts, and the dislocation of the hip is not affected by your effort or your touch after the time or the touch of any figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip joint, it is clearly declared to you that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch that muscle.
When you see the joints dislocated, and the dislocation is approaching the postmortem cauterization point, if you see the postmortem cauterization point, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, and it is hardly ever cured for all; and especially when you reach the rear parts, the bad effect is on all other types of dislocation, and with more pain, and visible movements that seem to want to end in death.
The restoration of the joint is when it can be reduced, and if it is possible to extend the flesh of the patient more, and expand the thigh, and the doctors are over the patient's chest and behind him, and they press the joint with their elbows on the bones of their fingers or the palm of their hand that turns in its place.
If the dislocation is in the rear parts, you must return as soon as possible, and double the flesh of the patient with his own skin, within which the hand presses the palm of the other hand.
And if the dislocation does not comply with reduction, you must apply strong extension and great force.
When two assistants extend the arms, and hold that painful area with two assistants so that it is not uncomfortable due to extension.
Then, if you rotate the arms completely, please note that they are wrapped in a long, doubled cloth over the body of the patient, or around.
When the physician touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to that part for the reasons that help in lubrication of the joint and ease; and then press the joint with a strong push as it returns.
And then the reduction of the cover that is placed over that bandage where it is sterilized and exfoliated with albuminous juice, and is extended over the stricture descent, and the arm is hung from the collarbone, and is left for several days.
And then slide it; and therefore, if the joint is formed in the desired location, you can slide the cloth of that arm and leave it there.
If you see that the joint is not tightening, you can repeat the ointment and the cloth of that arm, and leave it for several days until it is extended; and then slide it.
If an injury occurs to the joint, and its position is in movement, you should apply hydration in baths and gentle friction, and compression, when it is separated; or place over the dislocated joint, so it is a fatty thigh; and apply thereon, and lay it over the bone of the day and the nail. And if you take that off, and put it in a bath; and when it dries, you should gently rub the joint with your hand, and repeat over the dislocated one, so it is in movement, one turn, and the second, and the third. and when it is wet, enter if it is limited.
And if you want, place over the wet, slick cow's hide on the border and press it on that; and make some more turns, wet that and reduce to its position.
Chapter 28.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is about the joint between the arm and the chest.
When someone has dislocated their shoulder or arm, and the reduction of the dislocation is not smooth, and it is different from other joints, but rather slow in reducing it at the time of displacement, because the location is tense or if it occurs in a tense area, then cauterization may be necessary.
Then, place the joint of the thigh over a table and extend the leg, and press the thumb or palm against the joint, and push it back into its original position.
However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the abdomen of the thigh, and if the reduction is necessary, then place the two hands of the patient on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the reduction, then the position of the hand of the patient should be placed on the abdomen of that joint intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor covers the area of the joint.
And if you return it to its place, well; and if not, then press the joint firmly and release the tendon, and do not do this again, as otherwise, you will not be able to reduce it in the days that follow.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. For the intestine or hernia should be returned to its cavity, and your hand should be placed over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
When the intestine or hernia is returned to its cavity, place your hand over it and hold it there for several days; then slowly and gently exercise the muscles of the area.
If the movement of the area is not stopped and causes pain or discomfort, then apply cold compresses to the affected area and massage gently with your fingers.
Capitulum .xxix.
Of the cure of dislocation of the joints.
Some joints are dislocated in their entirety.
When someone is dislocated from one of the fingers or the abdomen of the patient, then you hold the finger and push it back into its place, as soon as it returns.
Then hold the top of the finger, suspend the finger from that part where it was dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
Then suspend the finger and extend it as soon as the swelling decreases in that day.
When the pain subsides, follow that second part of this narrative and do not delay sliding it in the day and exercising its movement, and follow that in the night; and continue for several days until it is straight.
And make it appear as if this is the case, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient and you hold it at that part and perform the first operation on the second day, when it becomes healthy.
And make it appear as if this is the case when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter .xxx.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When an injury occurs to one of the vertebrae or the lower back, and there are many other vertebrae in that same area that are not affected, it is not cured by simply treating those nearby, for death will soon arrive at the buttocks.
And it is clear that the suffering of the buttocks is outside one's will and cannot be held back; and if the patient's limbs are very painful, or their thighs or chest, or one of those; or a spine is needed at that location, where the pain is felt and removed from four parts.
And that has already been adjusted to the rear parts and is not causing any discomfort.
The cure of the patient is that you consider if the dislocation is due to weakness, where the other part is not affected and is not cured nor can be healed by that part alone.
In that case, if it is due to pain or pressure or appearance at those parts, the ancients had many ways of curing, of which the least effective was the one that caused more harm than good, due to its proximity to the exposed part, which I have already explained and formatted from different instruments of that, which I showed you and spread it.
When it is not cured by any of those, but only by that which I recommend to you, then it is truly gout.
If the thigh is extended over the face, covering the eye almost completely, and is extended further down the body, then it is truly gout.
And if a hard point is placed, it should be placed on the ground at the end of the thigh around the head of the patient, and another point should be placed on the other end of the thigh.
The physician should hold the point, and not be stopped in the pit; and another physician should hold it in the same manner.
And wrap around the head of the thigh and tighten the tail; and extend the end of the tail to the point where the head of the patient is, and fasten it there; and adjust all the ties and the ones on the other end to the tail of the foot.
And the physician should extend the tie to the point of the point, and do not be tightened the two ties and the ties of their parts in which they are placed, but rather not stop until they have said.
When the doctor places their hands on the spine for strength as they return, or if they place them on one table, and adjust the weight on the table as they return.
If it does not return in this way, you must take a table where the latitude or longitude is at the center of three bricks, and dig into the wall of the one where they said that the evacuation was located in the middle of the extremities of the table. And then stop the table on the spine, and the doctor places their hands on the other end, and starts as soon as the spine is straight and returns to the original location.
And if you want, open the one that is turning around the spine as the evacuation; and it is that you must fix yourself on the ground with the cap of the evacuation at the end of the plug two fists, the longitude of which is a bracelet, and you must have the cap in the end of the plug most excellent two fists; and the longitude that is between each fist and it is turned, and each one must be fixed on the ground so that it is not damaged.
When a bone is broken, it should be set in the right position and then rotated in the two directions of the two splints.
In the end of the foot, there is a point in which a nail is formed, whose length is such that it can be turned; and in the other two points, it seems similar to this one.
Then tighten the strings that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the point that you must cut off the head of the foot, and the strings that you have tied in the thighs in the turn that you must cut off the feet of the patient.
And you must cut off each turn and leave a master who turns the turn in its place, and the needle sews the spine according to what they have said.
Then push the spine back, and the place is engulfed, you have to cover with a paste that is not too thick, and then stop; and then cover over the pasted table of which the latitude is three or five times as much as the distance that takes the place of the yellowish part, and over the end of the spine sa.
And you should see if the string is according to what they have said, and use the healthy thigh as nutrition subtle within which it is.
If at any point during the treatment, you find that the patient's condition worsens and the medications prescribed by the doctor are not working effectively or within a long period of time, which have been recommended; and the treatment has been administered in that location, then the thin layer of plaster should be removed.
If any signs of impending danger appear at the end of the spines of the back, and it is caused by that displacement; and if that part has already suffered from what was not considered dangerous for this medicine, because it is very difficult for you to correct this mistake.
Chapter 31.
Of the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always cause displacement, but only in certain cases, and they do not happen to those that happen to the other small removals and concavitations.
And when the joint of the ankle is dislocated, it happens in four ways: either by the fingers, or by the toes, or by the heel, or by the back.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The dislocation of the joint is clear when you adjust the thigh bone according to the healthy thigh, it becomes long and bent that from the healthy one, and the thigh cannot fold the knee that you must lengthen, and it is the place where you must lengthen the knee joint using a cautery, because the top of the thigh has already come here.
The indication for this is that the accidents of the thigh are opposite to this accident.
The indication for this is that the accidents of the thigh are opposite to this accident. If it expands the knee joint according to another complement, but does not bend the knee that is in the denial, and if it goes forward and cannot be over there; and the urine of the patient is retained and the erection of the penis is cautery, and you must place the leg on the talus.
When you see that the leg has suffered a dislocation in the rear parts because it does not expand the nail, nor can it bend the nail that doubles around it, and the camba of the thigh is shorter than the other, and the nail is softened, and the top of the thigh is at that place.
The reduction of the species in this dislocation is that you consider, doctor, if the dislocation is old and antiquated, that it has already been anticipated by those who had that dislocation, and you administer reduction to it according to its own disposition, and you do not cover whether it is fit for that; and then it is not considered a sumptuous fayta.
In the one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, you consider that it comes to you because the joint has been extended and it has been expanded to the rear parts and to the front parts, and on the right and left, and fort he returns and does not require another cure.
If it does not return in this maneuver, you consider that you have prepared a strong minister and extended the camba of the thigh from where it was previously placed, or from the hands, or from what is being held over the nail; and another minister extends the part of that below so that the hands are further away from the thighs of the patient; and you stretch the leon over the rasor of the thigh, and hold another minister at the extremity of the leon.
If the extension of the patient or the part where the pain begins is from the shoulder to the acromion, or from the back to the elbow.
If the extension of all those parts is in a straight line within that space, and if the body is raised high above the ground and hangs downward.
This type of extension is unique to all four.
And if the dislocation returns as said, then so be it; otherwise, you must use this type of extension for all cases of that cure.
In the reduction of the own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts of the shoulder, then make sure that the body is hanging down over the top of the head; and place the limbs on the side of the foot in that location where the head of the foot meets the place where the elbow is; and extend the limb from the acromion to the last part of the shoulder.
And another minister firmly grasps the thighs and makes the large cavity of the patient's thigh larger by extending the parts that are out of place, in order to return it to its original location.
This is a special case of care in which this member is reduced that the other cases are not.
If you excuse me and do not obey the entry of this special case of care for the entire body, you will notice that the two feet of the patient are tied together with strong, firm threads, on both sides of the ankles and on both sides of the heels.
And the length of each of his parts is proportional to the number of four, and the thigh is extended more than the other by two inches.
And the thigh is suspended over the head of the foot, and it is in the most; and the length of it from the earth is the amount of two braces.
And command a young man to cut off the head of the thigh, and suspend it on another young man's thigh, and the other young man pulls the thigh back with strong force, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
If you reduce the part itself, when there is a dislocation at the end of the joint, notice that the thigh jags over the plug according to what has been recommended in the gelbozitat; and hold the cord tightly on the thigh proper and on the chest of the patient.
When the two fists are placed, one on the foot of the patient and the other on the head; and when they are adjusted, they should be placed on the back of the pillow that is covered with cloths containing cold humors, so that the thighs do not become chilled by the fist being between the thighs, because the extension to the parts beyond that will cause inflammation.
And if every physician extends to his part, and he places his hand over it, and then makes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the parts beyond, you should cover the camba with a thin cloth, and follow this method on the pillow; and the physician should place the palm of his hand over the patient's shoulder, and the other hand on the opposite shoulder, and then stop that extension at the part where the dislocation was.
If the dislocation is to the rear parts, you will not cover that the thigh is extended to the rear parts and is raised above the ground; if there are any hard places to be placed over, it depends on whether the ankle of the patient is dislocated to the rear parts, as has been said about the swelling of the knee over two ankles; and if the face and limbs are extended, as has been said, it has not harmed.
If there is an administered compression on the table over the place where the joint is to be made.
Then when the reduction is completed, according to which you cover — and the sign of the reduction is not troubled by you, and it is that you extend from the thigh to the leg, and when you see those angles and the thigh extends the angle camba and expands at that session's excuse, you know that the member follows — and then you adjust the thighs and pause the cushion and extend the bandage so that the thigh is not hurt in any of the parts; and adhere the thigh to the wounds for three days or four.
When cutting the limb and the bandage, compare one with the other.
If you see those teeth in your mouth, you know that the displacement is already firm, and then you can remove the splint.
If you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and stretch it again the next day, and keep it for three days.
And cut that, and make it lie in the ambulance for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the nose.
The nose is dislocated in three parts, four on the front, and four on the inside, and none on the back; and the nostrils are not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of the nose is that you command your thigh to apply your bandage to the cushion; you know that the nose is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the parts of the nose is that you make your thigh stretch the cushion as much as possible, if it can be placed over there; adhere the two ends to the face of the patient, and place the tip between the thumbs; and make the tip of the nose adhere to your palms, and extend those between the fingers of the nose on the tip of the nose, and other ministers extend the cushion as much as possible until the tip of the nose returns to its place.
When it comes to the matter of relieving the patient's pain, it is said that their ribcage clings to the thigh due to the lack of labor.
Then apply that and hold the ribcage to the thigh, and apply those plasters for three days or four, and then remove them.
And do not use the gallbladder's ulceration for more than three days, until it is cured and comfortable.
If the reduction of the patient's pain is excused, then administer fort extensive care to the ligaments that were involved in the previous cure.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of ankle dislocation.
Some ankles are slightly dislocated by small removal, and some are dislocated secondarily, and the dislocation of the ankle is made or at the joints of the fingers or at the joints of the toes.
And the saying of the dislocation of the ankle is that sometimes the ankle becomes flattened at the part where it is dislocated.
When the treatment of the removal of the tooth is of slight importance, and it is that it is extended as much as possible and it is returned as soon as possible.
When in the treatment of the dislocation of the joint, covering that you do not touch the thighs, and hold them firmly with a strong hand on the side opposite to the one from which the joint comes out.
And if you have your hand at the ankle of the spleen that has been removed, and your left hand at the part of the spleen that is in front of the foot in the cavity.
And if you pull the foot with your hand at your left, and hold your right hand with two fingers, and extend your right hand; and press the chest of the foot with the thumb of the left hand on the part opposite to the one from which the joint came out.
And make points according to what has been counted.
And press the chest of the foot with the thumb on the last point made, and you are in the cavity.
Therefore, if you return in one point or two according to this manual, and if the foot is engulfed, it is bad; and otherwise, continue with the operation, until that returns.
If it is forbidden to you to reduce the affected part that they have recommended, then make a juster on the patient's back over the ground, and make a small hole in the ground firmly, and place it between the patient's thighs, and you have already covered over the patient with the cloth so as not to expose the back.
And if the master of the foot holds the thighs, and another master extends the point on the foot of the patient's hands or the member that lies over the knee; and extends that each master against the extension of the thigh so that the hole is between the thighs of the patient retained by that, so that this part does not come out of the parts that you have extended.
And if the surgeon engages the dislocation in the thighs, and another master holds the thigh safe in the parts outside, so that the dislocation returns to the ease.
And when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction of the patient is declared to you, then stop plastering and extend that forcefully, and tie the member to the chest.
When you fear or guard against the nerves that are behind the sole of your foot, because the tendon over there is not strong and thin.
Then apply it for two or three days; and if the tendon becomes softened, remove that.
Then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. If you have passed the distance without pain, there is no certainty that the dislocation is not over the loosened and corrupted part, and therefore it does not receive care.
And if you fall into this trap, be careful that you apply the cure in the diarrhea of the water we mentioned in our story, in another place of care and decoction, as soon as it is possible.
Chapter 324.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Make sure that the one who is dislocated has few extension of his work; and that it is not difficult, advance a little.
If the dislocation is in the toes of the foot, then cover the ankle with a cloth and place the foot on a flat surface or a table, and hold it steady as if you are about to walk.
And if you are standing, and place the other foot on it to relieve the joint pain, and then gently push the foot back towards its original position, and see that it does not return to its original position and does not disappear in the eminence location.
And if you place the belly of the foot of the patient on a table that grips the entire foot, with two caps, and hold it stretched for three days; and then remove it and make it tight again after a few days, until it is stretched and secured.
Capitulum XXXV.
Of the special dislocations that are caused by gout, fracture, or any other cause.
When one of those causes occurs and you are in the treatment of that and its restoration, many visible successes follow.
For this, it is not presumed that the cure of the patient depends solely on the art, but rather on long experience, mercy, and compassion, and later, neither arrogance nor presumption; and it should be used at the beginning of medicines that only offer apostemas, and leave the malady to the divine judgment, not to that of which one hopes for salvation from loss, or for the alleviation of the malady, and in which there is any hope. When you begin to make the reduction of the patient at the beginning of the cause, it is necessary to use cautery.
And if the member returns later than we want, administer the medicine that contains cautery and cures the wound according to what is suitable for the patient of the dry wounds.
And if dislocation is mistaken for fracture and occurs in the separated bones of the lower extremities, you must perforate the statement of those bones, and make it known that it has been said in the simple diseases of that which is preceded in the places of those.
And keep and avoid after your virtue that of the intrament in the ways of fear according to what precedes your preaching; fourth, it is better for you to owe the true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to the one who sees those in his time. This is the end of the paragraphs of Albucasim perfectly of the words by which God is not benefited. Amen.
