O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine altogether with its fulfillment, and have made the end through its expositions and through its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all, so is the science perished and cut off, and there is nothing left of it but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordination of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and of preparation of them, as much as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes it to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of vessels, and to have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and of the moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, may take care that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm people; so that I have seen many times more than those who engage in this science and abandon their science and lack experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I see a foolish man who cauterizes an abscess from scrophula or the neck of a woman, and cauterizes the arteries of the neck; for that reason so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I see another surgeon who treats a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took it out with the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat it, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another mire who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the mire full of ignorance strained the fracture over the wound with tight ligatures, and did not let any ointment on the wound, and left it so; and he commanded him that he should not untie it; and stayed so long that the leg was entirely swollen and the foot and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it so it was in peace and he felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and it could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member as long as the members were all lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see, i. another sore that bursts an abscess, and then inflames by the wickedness of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not befit that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, work where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For that reason it is necessary that you guard yourself so that the foolish fools cannot speak ill of you.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish observer. 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise according to III chapters.  
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and are the chapters ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and the implements of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and are the chapters ordered, and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and are ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus as we remember of the work, it behooves me to speak of the quality of aid and of the nuisance of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and of the nuisance, is the most lengthy discourse and subtle science and the secret answers; and of this speak the most sages, and agree to this; and I suffice myself their words, because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally to every complexion where it has matter, for two complexions: that is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some said that cautery is great aid; and the other said the contrary: that cautery is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and it must not be cured by heat from a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and says he who says the contrary that cauterization makes great help to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, let no one intervene except he who has experienced it and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; of other complexions we have little fear, even in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the people gathered and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of more secret cures and greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and comes not out further than to the member which is burned, and does no harm to another member.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines come from member to another in separating, and bring to the member maladies of grievous healing; and by adventure kills the patient The fire for its height and for the goodness of his substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity. 
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I lose to you the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be made, and how much they are to be pricked.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is convenient in all times, because the harms arising are subdued by the aid of the cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains outside and until when they cannot wait for the time that greater malice may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish ones do; for the illness which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because the cauteries are nothing but a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain, and it is better than medicine for the hastiness of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And a certain thing is that illness comes at times according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue; and they are assembled in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of lead for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and it is so; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cauteries the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it appears well that cauteries is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more powerful than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the lesions from cautery do not cause decay, but that is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and cautery of gold works more than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And nonetheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is heated by the color of gold, and it cools too soon; and if one heats it too much; so it does with fire; and thus there are enough impediments.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery that we have made appearing in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, for that the way might be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Of olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two kinds of it done because of a disease called “soda,” and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold like paralysis and stroke and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine, making the head liquefy three or four times, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can endure; and then raise the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on his hips; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers come, if it bleeds then extinguish the cautery which is called "olivare", for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and pulling your hand up and down turning; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone that is small; and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; after take one pinch of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for three days; after put a wet cloth in butter; and leave it until the burn is gone; after cure the wound with ointment that is called «tetrafarmaçon», until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason they helped to open it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these said that one must leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then to set what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say the other that one should leave the cautery thus, and press so strongly that it lowers the bone as much as a spindle that women put in their spinning wheels for that the humors might issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in certain men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I ought to leave them; for the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more salutary and more useful to me, and from this use I work therefore in ensemble salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called «cochie», and of purging of head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not good.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take ward if the shoulder of the sick person is of a strong nature, and that it is not too cold; therefore cauterize it below that cautery that we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called «vasselz»; and there is one there in which one puts ventouses; and lightly hold your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it later; and it behooves that the cauteries of the horns be thinner than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the neck is purged by medicinal purges, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this profits not: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine hot and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of hot medicine are that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the husk and cut it 1 pock as 2 fingers' width, and then place it on the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can put the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed there so lie and restrain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then untie it and treat the wound fiercely with garlic, and leave the wound thus for 2 days or 3; then put on a cloth soaked in butter as long as it covers it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment cure until it is healed; and if you see this do any of the burning medicines that I have written or doze treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is thus according to this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as follows: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo, or it has .i. pock of curvature, and in its middle, a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and press the fire lightly, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and raise your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and runs an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in awe of silk, and place it on the spot for .iij. days; then put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at its entire point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet ancient.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not benefit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called “cultellare” until it is white; and thus rule over the painful place a line of half a finger’s length, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain yourself that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come near the bone; and guard the jaw so that it does not move when one puts it in, and the nerve does not feel only that which is mute and that spasms does not come to the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and especially to him who does not know about it, and who is not a student and has experienced; and leave the work half-way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not benefit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two points; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called 'point', because of which its form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After prick all around the ear of the sick person, or at the two if the pain holds in both, and distance yourself a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to engrave; and make ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment which must be cured by cautery is not worse than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not make cautery on the appearances that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this appearance of torment which moves from phlegm of the eyes and purgings of the head and gargles, and these are not enough, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a poke of fire on the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery from the top of the ear above a bit below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery there until half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the appearance of the cutellaire that we have put before, but it is a bit more subtle and it behooves you that the knife be a bit larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it be healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large doses and pills that stimulate the brain; afterward raise the head of the patient all up, and put on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if I do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy thus, it is well; and if he is not, make to him three cauteries from the middle of the head downwards to the neck, and have a space between each cautery two of thickness; and cure it as the others, and if you see it joining, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and what we have said before; after which anoint the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is far, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after that cure it until it is healthy, and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to temper the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffers from a lot of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer it, make gargarisms and chewing tempering the brain often with well-cooked meats; afterwards, he places a crown in the middle, and makes 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the humidities corrupted and phlegm thick, then you cauterize with these cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have raised the head of the sick person; after make one torteil of linen well made, as well as one circle, if you put it within the head; and the sick person sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and it is worth mixing with butter of sheep ancient; and the heat to fire temperately, so that the two when he puts it may suffer; after empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person each week once with other good government, until he be healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see them cauterized by making more points throughout the whole cautery. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then places on it cotton moistened in butter and lard of gelling. 
de l’awe des eulz	of the opening of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the opening of the eyes comes first according to the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient things purifying the head, and guarding it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, command him to turn his head back, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descent of the opening is to the 2 eyes together, or 1 if the descent is in 1; and cut all cauteries through all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then restrain it as best as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how to stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or heater below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Of the course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head's outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: 1 cautery removes the chief, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or heater below the 2 bones; and if there is need more, so it cauterizes wisely above the eyebrow to all 1 small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of the course of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit, then give the patient 3 cups of wine; after which let him rest his head, and make a cautery or middle of olive cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called “clavilis” on the two wrists, one below the hair; and guard yourself from the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called “clavilis”:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called “olivare”. 
de coi ci est li forme:	of this thing is the form: 
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and even, then place the patient in your healthy; after draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like as the leaf of the myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign beside the hairs; then put cotton moistened in the white of an egg and muslin of persillion on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, that the hairs be burned in the place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised at the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave thus .iij. days, then put cotton moistened in butter as long as the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on the same place as you did first; and if the hairs are withered, so cauterize until the paper be raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and make it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread upon the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and place on top of the paper the eyes; and if the malady holds in .i. eye only, so must one operate in .i., and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the broth of an egg; and let the head of the patient be in your hand and place your thumb showing on top of the medicine, and press .i. poc and a little more every time that the patient feels pain from the medicine, because it feels pain as much as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this long, so remove the medicine with your thumb.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is passed, then lift the place of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it doesn't work well, put back the medicine on the same place where the medicine didn't work, until your works are equal, and your eyes set; then put cotton moistened in butter until the sore is covered, after cure the place of the ointment called «dyafenis» and another, until it is healed.  
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary, that you guard well your work with great care that it does not fall from the medicine into the eyes. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the parchment becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that place which is softened by the parchment properly, as you have done before; after curing it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf: 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head on your healthy side; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or wobble their head; after put cotton moistened in the white of egg or in the juice of parsley on the eye; after warm the cautery which is like: and place it on the head as its shape of a goose feather, along with that which the cautery be; if you see, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, so also like a tent; but anyway, this which is shaped worths for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and remove the rot, and dry it; and if it is closed, so work it, and remove the contents from the bow; after put on the warm cautery form, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part of the white below the eye, that your hands do not make folly; and place the cautery in the grease of the eye, and the corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If it does not close, reapply the cautery once more, and another if you have need of it, and leave it for III days; after which place upon it moistened cotton in butter, and cure with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if XL days pass and it is not healed, then apply medicine corrosive aqua until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what would come in his chapter.  
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a manner of cauterizing a fistula which none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to fistula, and make an opening; after place within the fissure a subtle thread of which this is the form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make to the quantity of 3 of plum; and hold your hand or camomile firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the plums melted do not run to his eye; and it is necessary one put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine of figs or in honey: the plum so art the place of fistula, and the healthy by miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer pus to the nose and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.  
des crevaices en levres	Of incisions in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often happen incisions in lips that are called "hairs", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you cure these incisions of those that we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then use i. small surgical cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he puts it carefully into those hollows until it comes to the bottom; after, heal the place with cerote until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swelled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit; therefore it is necessary that you have i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you burn or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron glows at the bottom of it, and where it ends; and do this once or twice, after curing with what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that's good; and if this is not so, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	Of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the head of the patient in your hand; after heat the cautery whose form will come here afterwards in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot gently, and hold as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after raise your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keep it for an hour and remove forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupting dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or moisture, and the treatments of medicine are not worth it, then there is need for cautery according to two manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of leek, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and envelope on the tip of a tent, and moisten it in heated butter, and put it on the aching tooth firmly and hold until it cools; and thus do often as many times as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moist wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put one hot iron until the heat comes to the top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries in the fire assembly are such that you prick a handle of iron or steel, and be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, because its form will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then raise the root; and this is the form of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make cautery where you want, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the caine:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize the head of fire as follows comes the form, and it has openings for the fumes to issue to the cautery of the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it so for III days; and put on cotton moistened in butter as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place of ointment and tents until it is healed. 
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the chain: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the humors prevail upon the channels of the throat, and even when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by medicines solutives; after that you make cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come even up to the throat, and burn only as much as an inch. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the fire cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and be the cautery which is called “clavicle” for that we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy. 
de la toust	of the  thrust
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and diseases of the body are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is ancient, if you make two cauteries on the shoulder in their veins; and one other cautery between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be called 'clavile' according to the form that is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make cautery by pricking at all the cautery which is called “point” because of how its shape is before in the sickness of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or until it heals. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the place according to what is said before, and let the cautery be at three reins according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for those are lighter cauteries, because you make them 3 in a row.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward sovieze the patient on his back and on his ribs; after lift the heart which is within by the two of your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then cauterize with the instrument which has .ij. ners as this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib, and there would be the figure of the cautery together .iiij. cauteries; and for that is made cautery with the cautery which has .iij. ners, so that the figure of cauterization are sis cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes is adjusted on this, that is, nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery parsley crushed with a seal; after make rest the patient, and let not the members be moved for a long time until he is well fortified.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then make a cautery above the clavicle's thick part, or many cauteries by pricking. 
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed. 
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and much moisture until it is against its complexion, and are multiplied catarrh to him, and the accustomed ways of cures and he does not profit at all, therefore it is necessary that the patient be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this then I make III cauteries I below the collarbone of the hip for the quantity of a dime, to all the clavical cautery, and II cauteries defuers the II ribs as long as the figure of the cauteries is at III angles, and have such spacing between one and the other that they not be joined together when they will rot; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they reach the II parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment: 
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and reigning upon the stomach there. point according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize the whole cautery which is called "poins". 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healthy. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is been moved from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is cured of those that we have said in divisions, and he does not benefit, so it is necessary that the patient be tended upon his bed; and sign of III cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, beyond the hypochondria, where the guts of the man come; and have spacing between each cautery the size of a finger; and let the cauteries be long in length of the body, and do not press your hand too much on the whole cautery; and be burned only half of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, so lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form: 
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauteries with the curette, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and take care that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make the whole body dry; and that it does not come to boiling, for the hearts are very subtle there, and you know how to see. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, he feels pain sharply.  
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure has failed to work, it is necessary that the patient be treated on his head; and then place a light cloth on the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the shape of... 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cautery until the kernels are burned, and it comes to the syphac, so that the porreture is whole fire; after the cure according to the cure of the essues until it is healed; and it does not behoove any but those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore he may boldly work, and always it seems to me better to leave it. 
dou cautere de pleuresin	of cautery of pleura
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient said that one must make to pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; and moisten it in oil, and press it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauteries a little descending in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two as two ribs below the cautery that is between two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said any old man that any man uses a cautery of fire like a razor, and it is heated and put between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and jumps out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.  
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of mice, according to what we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then there are three kinds of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which manner so it is that you make III cauteries, or IIII, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back; and another manner of cautery so it is that you heat the cautery which has II nerves, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is above the mouse, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation with which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body. 
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After he puts the two nerves inflamed until the heart is pierced on the other side, and then withdraw the cautery, and thus there will be IV And if you see, then cauterize the whole cautery at III nerves.  
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has become rotten for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures mentioned before.  
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except for the method called “asclytes”. 
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make IIII cauteries around the breast, and I on the stomach, and one on the liver, and I on the spleen, and II behind the back on the spine, and I where the nipple is; and let the cauteries be well near the depth of the heart. 
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery uncovered to fight rot for a long time, and let not the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle that we have before shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is put before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrophic, and are full of a citrine awe, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with it, so tightly encircle the yellow wax-like cavity, and be the cautery according to this form. 
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the cuttlefish; and be the cauteries long, one below the knee front and the other out, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries towards length without curing, that they are in his; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in stomach and in intestine is flebbed, and cannot be cured by ways of cures; and you see the patient well suffering and of strong virtue, then make .i. great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before about cautery of the stomach, at the cautery circulating; and .iiij. cauteries around the navel subtle to each .i. cautery clavicle subtle, and .ij. cauteries on the loins.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each buttock, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are either at the base, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is all outside of the almecate poc and poc by triangulating, and I cautery below the bud II two; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the face, then one makes a large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and the other on the liver, and the other on the mice to all cautery clavicle; and let the cautery remain open long time. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care the place until it be healed. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh that is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the "thelul," if you heat the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it on fire upon that "thelul" while cutting; and let it there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this one or two times, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each as we have said; after the cure of blemishes benefiting as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the "alchatim," it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, then there comes such a malady that can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When to anyone comes fistula, and is filled and gives putrefaction and moisture corrupted, so the does prove at once a fine tent, and keep that you know at once the tent how much it has of depth. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and putting it in the fistula according to the quantity that the thing entered there, and reheat the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burnt, once, or II or III times, according to the quantity of its need; and guard against burning the nerves that are inside, and the large veins.  
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these parts, and do not make incisions there except in their fleshy part, and think that it is not completely pierced; after healing the place as long as it is healthy, and if the places are clean, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the places are healed completely; and if the materials are not removed, know that the places are still unhealthy, and rotten the bone at its source; and thus like one of these that we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	Of the illness of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great windiness, and they take no sustenance from a woman, then it behooves you to make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will make more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery in the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as the finger; and make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be awl-shaped according to the form stated above.
de la marris	of the groin
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the groin is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends come late; and when they do come, great pain is felt: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the pudendum, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be awl-shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous humors descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and is found the place of the viscus department, so it befits you to cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip to i. cautery resembling a circle, and place it before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle; and if the cautery be such as that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then make three cauteries of the olive large, and let the cautery be as well-formed as all the others; and cure it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in the division, and the cure is not good, and the illness is old: then it becomes necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to II manners: that is to know together medicines ardent, and fire cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	A fire cautery is according to many ways, of which some are such: that you cauterize upon the bone of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and great, and have between each cautery a space the size of a two, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle upon the head of the hip, for which there are IIII according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, you cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the marrow are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the manner by which it is done in sciatica when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers' width, on the left side a point; and whether the cauteries are cuticular or whether they burn the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery which is called 'points'. 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And this craft is if he makes more; and if it be known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes cautery with the curette or circular cautery, and well guard in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery as to burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not make more nuisance and contraction for the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly solution from which he died. 
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. 
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, for this is the manner, make such iron and be at the head as large as a nutmeg seed, or a little less, and be between bars and be from one bar to the other with space the quantity of a finger node; and let the bars be towards two parts, and let them be also like nuts, and there have I hip of iron well made; and this is the form:  
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and give it feeling, and then put it on the bone of the hip of the diseased, and let it be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery reont and let it leave for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound stay covered long time; after the cure of oiling until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim said that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its effect, and few who use it are seen; and nonetheless, these are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of medicine burning is such that you make the instrument to be intertwined in which descends the edge of the gate, and be of iron or of an appearance long, and in height it has II nous, and has between each one the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and be opened below and above, and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the boil of the hip on the patient lying upon his healthy side, and after your hand much above the boil of the hip; afterwards throw between the two circles of the hot water which be warmed by the fire I point, and leave it one hour of the time, and suffer the patient the heat and the burn of it. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is found medication also as of fire; and when the medication is passed, raise your hand with the instrument and raise the haunch with gentle force, and leave thus III days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scalding is gone; and let it be III days that rot may draw out; and this would be the last help after the cure of ointmentings until he is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, then you make the instrument that holds it like what you did in the hip augmentation; and this is the manner of the hot awe, and I have written it or treated of the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is the small hole of fire, so that the point of a razor can enter; and put under one pot and the other pot well plugged, and put on top alkali and chalks and sweet awe, as long as it has the right amount above the powders until you have taken it well into your hand; and leave it so until it descends awes and chyme or pot plugged, then take all that awe, and throw it on chalks and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it will be very helpful and is administered in work of medicine and in cauteries of other members Because she does the same work as fire, and so with other medicines which one cauterizes well the hip just like honey and anacardi nuts and chalz with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Gauls tell us about a cure of which one man was cured of the pain of the hip and sciatic vein, and he loved it very much, and said that no other cure was done to him, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches afterwards. 
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And say in this manner that you take the litharge green fresh and dry, and grind it well with a bit of grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain holds, and the lie; and leave it III hours and by the quantity that the patient does not feel the burn anymore.  
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter into bath until the body is a little aroused, and make him enter into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.  
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that none must use cautery of such medicines, unless after evacuation of the body. 
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a fire of sheep, it helps much; and it must be done the cautery in such manner. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and rub it with old oil, and put it on the ditch that is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called fosse. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking strands of dry goat hair, and putting them on fire until they are charcoal, put it on the wool, and leave it there until it is stained; and do this again, and do not stop doing this until you think by sense that it comes to the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat". 
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or from too much bloodletting, or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances is good for cautery except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be void of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with a punch, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make .iij. or .iiij. cauteries at the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see them and you view him cure, then cauterize him with this cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.  
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, so cauterize around the spine with the cautery pricking two lines or three, and let the points be near each other. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After care for the place as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and take care that you do not administer cautery in a glib manner which is in the nerve’s spame 
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints are from moisture that is spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the wise call “podagra” properly, and when it is of cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then to it you apply the cautery all over as one calls 'point'.  
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you make a cautery on each knee III cauteries or IV of each part, with all olive cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand hard except as long as the espés of the heart is burned. 
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter.  
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the forearm 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the shoulders or to the armpits, then cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and ponder medicines.   
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good governance and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.  
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the hip
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs and it is new, so when you see it cured, that he does not move that day; and that he use things which bind his belly, so that the cord descends from his belly; after the do make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the testicles are repaired, and place them in your palms, and sign with a little below the rupture on the bone of the thigh, and a whole sign that is like half of a circle above the body; then cauterize with this which is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it feels gentle. 
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bones to their place; and the minister holds his hand over them so that they do not return backward; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him the cushion and the sergeant on the thighs, and the other on the hip which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and the right one and the left one as far as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again another until you come to the bone; and be careful that the bone does not jump when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other harm. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. 
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of great people also as large according to their measure; after III days cure of their place with butter cautery until the burning is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and the patient lies XL days on his back until the wound is well glued together; and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened lengthwise so that the boil does not protrude when he wants to go into rooms. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he will want to rise, administer to him a well-made splint, and bear it for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he works little and keeps himself from too much repletion of drinking and eating, and from too much high braire; and when he does this teaching so is healed entirely.  
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall say here after the cure of tailoring in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then you make the fire cautery to them according to its quantity, and either burn one third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it must be cauterized with the three-angled cautery according to this form. 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the incision and make a line across the width above the fracture, and another below, and hold your hand over the entire area of the cauterizing clamp. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable. 
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or from striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins," and let the cauterization be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and of its pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, begin another cautery on that one, for it is customary that it must change in the member that it is near, which is why you must make the cauteries as long as the patient remains healed. 
de meselerie	of mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and also the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see the cauterization, take care that the patient is at the beginning, and if she is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not depart or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the illness, then I make V cautery on the top: one of the chief nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the cheek; and II on the II horns, and I behind on the hailerel; and there leave your hand so that the cauteries come to the bone, and as long as the scales come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize the mice according to what it is before. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it manifests itself clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the middle of the neck, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. large one on the knee and .i. other below it, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the ribs, and .ij. on the tendons of the hip, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the lower heel bone so that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done to make a cautery on the bone of the arm, and .i. other on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And knows that when more it makes of cautery, more it does the help, and moves him profit; and knows that the patient does not feel any pain in the cautery as much as the healthy ones feel it, because the body is already all corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in methods of iron. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After cure the place with flour of wheat with honey and other cures until it is healed. 
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a swelling comes in any limb and is treated by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a little point entering into the thickness of the skin; then cure with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes one makes cautery by hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus so is the swelling removed; and anyway let no one interfere unless he knows the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body. 
de albaras	of splints
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the ailment called "albaras" is advanced, and medicines are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery a small puncture, according to the quantity of the heart's essence, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and colon blood and alondine blood, of each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and expose it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of a chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the ulcer.  
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the sages said that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the sore; and nevertheless, this does not seem to me good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and more right thing is that it be cauterized around, at the cautery which is called «circule», as we have said in much of cauteries. 
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes a long time to die, or because of the superfluity that it produces, or because of the water of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after which leave it so. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it grow worse with the entire cauterization, then heat the cautery with this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the malady which is called “adubelati” until the cautery has pierced the kernel, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a manner that the course of the rotting is altered. 
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure as long as it is perfectly healed. 
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of sickness there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing else but a rotting of the limb, because it eats away at the limbs as if the flax were drying lines. 
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can suffer fire cautery, then sharpen the cauteries small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted be removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places softened broth with oil until the scabs from the fire are removed, and all the corruption. 
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the care of wounds producing flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after III days that char is healthy and has not grown, it is good; and if those do not, restart the cautery on those which remain corrupt from their place. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this ailment has sometimes been cured with a hot water potion in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the hot water potion in the division: take it when you need it.  
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	from the roots that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that because of fire a disease is born which is called "clots" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that inflames the foot.  
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cautery for this disease is according to 2 manners.  
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and cautery of hot water. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the iron cautery as if it were a quill of vulture, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can bend the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle edges; after it is placed hot upon the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it so for III days until it begins to give pus; then I make a plaster of wild mallows ground with honey, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and will be uprooted from its roots. 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the place with ointment, keeping it covered until it is healed. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire in the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it behooves you to bring them cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or steel, or a plume of violet, and put on the nail and the armpit, that is to say, for warts; and put the cane on so that it pricks all around, then put a drop of hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep to the root; and suffer the patient a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then let him thus, and he will be eradicated all at its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another, until you have scraped all those which are on the body, then treat the incisions that produce flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	The cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make 4 cauteries or 4 on the spine of the back, 1 cautery between each spine; and 1 cautery or weight, and 1 on the stomach at the olive cautery; so he will cease to tremble, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At no time appear by fires bathed body, or pus pimples, that come from large corrupted matter. 
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary at first when they appear that one make cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point be taken to the fire, or of a long arisotle root, or to the lentil cautery.  
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the superfluities from which they come are removed, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.  
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great spurts of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to bleed.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nonetheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very much until the bleeding is calmed under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put on fire the olive cauteries smaller and larger as many as they are red; then take one, or a large or small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps outwards when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make these one after the other until the wound is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the vein shortens from the artery, it cannot be well stretched even when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch blood; and be bound and strained adequately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring tightening of the strap or tightly bandage with cloth or set things burning upon it, or similar things, if it does not profit so much.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has no medicine present, then he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind it until it is stretched over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the thumb, but often moisten with cold water that be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make those in front who has need for cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicines, and their applications and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter from the head down to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find it easier, for what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.  
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	Because many kinds of people come to cures.  
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	So there come those who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily because of the misfortune they find in their disease, and the greatness of their malice; and one should fear these. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who give you their meaning, and say: “Wait, I am healed”; and the patient is deceptive.  
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It does not behoove you to consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not operate foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain, and whom you can have taken and praise; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your sick to what health may be converted; and these will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of length. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most dear son,
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised you from the head to foot, for those that you find more easily those which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes many times to children after birth, and when the midwife strains too hard the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and in all those that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in such cases.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it; and believed so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide fissure; and as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more deep, and the abscess is larger, you make two fissures in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head open on each side, and the water leaps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you; then it is necessary that you cut in the middle of the head three fissures according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture.  
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After you have strained the incisions of bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it so until the fifth day; then unbind it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and leave the chief bandage to be tightened, and then feed the patient dry meat with little moisture as long as the limb is fortified and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and the assembly of the water; for sometimes it is before; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and the fullness of the water, and open it according to what you have power; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein flow blood, so that the patient dies from the decrease of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the breast, and the illness is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last cure is cautery with this one by which they cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, when you see them covered, that the patient bends his head backward; after rubbing their skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then strain the patient's neck to all the cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and then they are placed back; then sign the veins on the inside, then cut both sides with a sharp spatula from II parts, as long as the skin comes to the bone, and that's by the broadness of the head. 
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, thrust the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood jumps out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the feeling, then it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of III fingers, then govern by joining and making until the bone; and that which is necessary to put out blood is VI c/, and by chance one point more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then regard the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the syphilis, then cover that abscesses may not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and the cure of ointment until it is healed. 
de emigrainne	of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When a longstanding migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the humors of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit them, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is poco returned outward than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, it straitens the neck of the patient with some drapes, then rubs the place with any rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula for which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then treat it upwards towards the pincers, and depart well from the webs that are below each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turn it to the tip of the awl, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two chies. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it does not jump without pain throughout all of it. 
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And drive out the blood from .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the artery is large, it behooves you to tie it in .ij. leus with a double strong silk thread, so that putrefaction does not come before the welding of the wound, and comes bleeding; then cut off the superfluity which is between the .ij. liens in the same hour, and then, if you will, cauterize it with the cutellaire cautery up to the bone until the chies are cut; and this is the middle work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is aid to finish the moisture: for this it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put on them tents well made; and when one unties them, be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until they are healed; and if without a short of the artery as much as you work it, then haste to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain it in your hand that the blood be stopped; and if you do not have these present, then put on the place your loincloth as long as the blood is frozen, and raise the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and be strained as it is necessary; and that which is milder and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant of .ij. parts, but the trenches be well spaced to keep longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments is too thick, it holds less its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And must have between the two knives one should be of wide space, and then when you have signed on each of the two sides, and you put hot iron above until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two lengths; and let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not soldered by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on the forehead of the head of force, and it does not benefit medicine treatment at all when it is done, and you see the face of the patient wrap around, and feels the forehead with trembling as if from fright; and where oil is present and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls out, and the eyebrows are scorched, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the ancients "contused cure," and is that you do behind the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has or forehead, then make III incisions or forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as II should all the front down in going until neif, and the others II as II ribs above the papers, and guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are as II ribs above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the II mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of III does across joins; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much of cloth for wiping the blood, then put the sharp spatula from II parts of this is the form: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that is between the 2 incisions to all the scalp that is above the bone, then make another part from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract further this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put in the first split the instrument that is called "cultellar," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the rib cutting towards the flesh to the heart, and the rib underneath toward the bone, and the point until it comes to the middle fissure. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head as eyes until the incision is continuous to the one who opens the heart, and then another part make in the middle fissure to the other end; and then extract the blood evenly, and express their place for the blood taken; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on top cloths moistened with wine and oil and asafoetida, and keep that abscesses do not come; and on the third day untie the ligature, and then administer great plant of warm water, then the cure of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures with which one cures wounds, until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a certain catarrh comes acutely and you see the eyes watery and small, and the vision weakened, and the papers burned; and the hairs fall out, and where the chief is it causes sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that these matters and this catarrh come only from many veins, and the cure that there is, it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to lower their forehead, then make a great fissure between the brow, and another in the wide space above the eye. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begins from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and move your hand from the nerves of the temples that move in eating; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton there, and linen bandages; then tie above cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, that make cartilage. 
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of flower of wheat and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with it; and administer it to these wounds in order to stop the pus from spreading everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear, stone or other manner of thing that does not join with the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear to the sun. 
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and have him sneeze with conditions, and plug his nostrils when the sneezes come, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times force comes by this cure; and if it does not come with force, then administer an extraction with fine pincers, because this is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the pincers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine incision of small doubleure; and if it does not jump out by this, make a snake of lead and thrust the head of the snake or passage into the ear very hard, and plug what is around the snake with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the snake; then pull it out forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a gut of what those who catch birds use, and put it into some instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a dab of cotton around it; then press the gut on the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not go away from all these things that we have said, then you hurry to split the ear thus that an abscess comes out and spasms; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient bleed from the head, and extract the blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends; and let the split be as a crescent moon, until you come to the bone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it diligently with your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are in it and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue forth, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision to that grain.  
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear therefore that falls it is proper for the patient to use a first-place ointment, and fill the ear with old cotton.  
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie lying on that same ear where the water is.  
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she has jumped for this, it is good. 
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not come out, then take many stones according to the length of your finger, and heat them a bit in the fire; and put one in the patient's ear where it hurts, and place another above the one that is in the ear; and do not cease from doing this of stone into stone until the water comes out entirely, and so shall it come out entirely; and if you see it, then take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end hold in fire until the end of the reed be burned; then redo another piece of reeds until the water comes out entirely, as we have said about the stone. 
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body that one can feel it, administer extraction with tweezers; and it is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if you see any worms, then you treat them with subtle tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the cannula of which this is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed them all at the chain; do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey this, stuff the ear with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them treated in the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear to all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see. 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be of silver or brass narrow below at i. small openings, and above open for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation i. instrument of brass well made for this, and if you see take i. razor and wrap around the point evenly cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the chain, and the chain be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be i. pock heated over a fire then one distils it into the ear; and keep that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the closing of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these closures come at times from within the ear, if one cannot see them; and at times it comes .i. pock of pus, and one sees well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That one which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of great healing in more dispositions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opening, then the work has all these spatulation, as to what this one is formed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be it sharp and trenches in front and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or core of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppuration is in the ear, then take a small and light razor and heat it a little in the fire, then put it into the side of the ear.  
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the puncture, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding comes, dip a sponge and drape it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treated by distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper of the sheets
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This healing that comes on paper of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, so you should extend them with tweezers and pliers, and cut from a spatula at their roots; then put over it powdered vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without it decorticate, so you cauterize with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth moving; and many times repair, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, so are those roots burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gristle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem brittle in its form and in its hardness, and for these is this disease called "gradual", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take heed if the hail moves from one part and another, and it's a light thing to know; do then with the broad, then the peel of each part lightly, then take it with pliers, and cut. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without perceiving a bit of the paper, do not grieve the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the flesh restores it quickly and hinders cartilage. 
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstorm is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and being the hailstorm with pliers, and cut it and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is separated by incision, it does not harm; and when the hailstorm is cut, let the eye water with salt water, and cure the place of that which forms flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is engendered in the webs of the papers above, and this happens more to children than adults, and grieves much their eyes, and they come to them cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun for that reason because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for that reason they lie down on their faces down, and sleep upon them, and are their papers under their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your thumbs and feel the cartilage between them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your bosom; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach of each part, then put it on top of it; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture on the spatumile a notch of a width, and not be more than large as the wound that you make to the vein; and make the skin in part until you come to the exinach; and in more arrangements comes exinach from the opening, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract therefore a whole piece of cloth charpit between your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the opening, that you do not come to all the spatumile up to the eye, that you do not blind it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the crack, then slightly enlarge the crack until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in wine and water, and put them on the spot, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind corn and put it on to corrupt the moisture which is stagnant. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure until it is healed. 
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place abscess hot, so the cure of plasters soothing until it is healed.  
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When on paper the hairs grow adjusted other than nature's, and are old, they harm the eyes, and bring manner of maladies like tears accustomed, and softenings of the papers and albugine, as much as it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and stitch or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the chief of the patient on your healthy, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if that no, there puts an needle to all .i. thread above; and be that below the margin of the paper or the hair grows beside those hairs, and draws .i. thread to the above to all the paper, and turns it to the razor; then does in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, to all the spatula cutting, from the great tear to the small; then extracts .i. thread, and puts below the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then seizes on the paper a figure of ench, like the leaf of myrtle, and altogether it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if to someone who needs it one copes a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make on all the spatula upon the II lines that you have signed, and commence the large tears up to small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the incision into one of the II angles of the heart, then scrape it all; then assemble the II lips with a stitch of a needle to all the thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of the fibers on the II eyebrows to all no sticky things, if you see fit to do this; and if not, have no care about it, then leave the stitch and the fibers up to III days or IV; then cure the wound without stitch with dry and constricting things, because the paper revives by the joining of the wound and the assembling of it, but the stitch is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear; and if in another manner: and that you sign the paper of a figure which is as well as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, to III incisions separate according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, take a needle that has thread, and put it in the figure; and put the other thread beside the large tear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so appease it with cerote and similar soothing ointment; and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial. 
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the fold inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. canes by art, and .ij. subtle liens as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut off the .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what surmounts the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. canes of the .ij. parts form; and let it stay thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and rise, until it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is late, if he copes with some force, then cure him until he is sound; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the II canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you prick an agile needle, and it puts .i. thread of silk soft and subtle; then assemble the shoulders and tie one and the other subtly, and be the length of the threads a palm long; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the chief of the thread; then put the patient's head on your healthy; and be below the sun so that the works are declared, because it is one work subtle and small, then put the needle to all the chase in the root of the hair adjusted, and make it pierce in the paper carefully until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair, if there is .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, so you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for .ij. days or .iij., until the hair hardens in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hairs are small, so accompany one long hair from the natural hooves, and be raised with that one or you leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the rot of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness which is called "aleocrati" or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.  
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by blow of wound, or cutting or cautery, and by similar things.  
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of working on it is that you split that suture and separate its lips, and put inside tents of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not fitting that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain.  
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	Car if you do this, the illness returns worse than at first; but there is work of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or ale and flax seed are cooked, and diacylon ointment melted in any oil, and enclose a tent, and cure with this. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form it was before; and these operations that we have said are nothing but addresses for this illness, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the char which comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is dislocated is truly called “axacrati,” and is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you prick an awl, where it has the double thread, and stick it into the carrion, and make it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the thread comes to the two shoulders of the carrion; then is the carrion above all the awl, and the cap at the spatula wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is right, it is good; if those are not, then take the razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits where cost inside the paper; and be the heads of the two slits the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and let them be made so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has the name "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its cost is raised down, from those who follow the paper, then adjust the two parts separated, and the edges with a thread of wool; then care for what we have said of softening medicines, and bandages, as long as it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the ailment comes from a split or seam or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain split under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the ailment, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip anything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what it is necessary of work and instruments in more dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper's  humidity
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering occurs to the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the paper, and raise it up; and the extent as pinches, as long as you cut what is hard to the spatula subtly, which is not too thick nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too thick or bleaches the eye; and let your incision, with which you scrape that assembly, be slightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all that assembly, and make no times in the salt water of the eye, and the sweet water lift, and coliere; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in an abundance of egg; and after the third day use the coliere and the things sudans as long as it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is in two ways: it is fleshy and seeming to one hard skin, and another which is not fleshy, but seems like white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and one cures it by pincers, one cannot; and the one and the other semblance begins towards the great tear, and crosses point by point until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then he opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coils the angle with small pliers, and the one above; then take a needle, and put it one hair of horse, or deer, or ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a point and stick it in the angle, and pierce it to the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the one above, and scrape to all the hair the side of the angle which follows the eyebrow and the silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear to the whole spatula subtly and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear, so that by incision does not come the body of tears accustomed; and at no time is the angle placed only once, and to the thread, as we have said; then scrape it all over the spatula from this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the spatula does not touch the fleshy veil and break it, and that the prickle is not pierced; and after the incision throw into the eye a little bit of silk ground up, and from the collar made of litharge, and let it remain until the next day; then cure it as it requires until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot push the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lighter point according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not and the reason is hastened, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of litharge and red collar and silk ground up, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation, as long as it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a boil, then cauterize, and cure the boil first until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it with a bandage, and cut a part and not half, that body of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of lead white.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which is born on the iris
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	The eyes of some men are born sometimes red, and cover the eyelid and restrain upon the papers and turn them to the outside, and seem like a rose of balauste; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your healthy, then the worker opens the eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable needles to those, and hold it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go all cutting to the raseur until the end, and keep that you do not blind the eye during the work; and be the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the ankle and as the small forces of which one removes the sebel, as the form after this chapter shows it; and when the incision is accomplished and removed all that flesh, then apply the oil of seil crushed or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the eye fur with abin of egg, so that it be assured of a hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the without cloth surrounds, and you doubt hot abscess, if leave the eye and cure the abscess of things appeasing hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus do until all flesh is adjusted in the eye by this semblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless it is necessary that you align the cure of each weak eye of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in surgery of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Veins are red that are covered over the eye, and take away from sight their work and weaken the eye all days. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that you first examine if the eye, in which it is, is good, and nothing else is wrong, except for the eye; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your lap, then suspend those veins all along the line according to his wisdom, and let the lines be thin double according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two circumferences be by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then this coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill into the eye  green and red colic for to corrupt what is remaining of the vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to gather all these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things that appease the pain of the eyes, and let it rest for several days until the pain is appeased and the abscess is assured hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The fistula is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of what here are the form; and it is called “sharp chief,” and is made of fire iron to one chief point, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it upon the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little as long as you know that this corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is closed, and flesh has grown, and the belly of the bow is closed, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not renew and is not an abscess, know that it is healthy; if this is not the case, there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to its opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the forepart according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft be thinned out until the top as you see here. 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it upon the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand from the eye a little, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes in this if he holds his hand on his nose; and then return to the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the places, so it goes the material to the nose; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient. 
de l’issue de l’oil	from the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance to the cheek or decrease, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal, then place suction cups or a haterel without injuring to suck, then put on the eye i.i. linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and place it over bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths enough soft, and double each in .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has need; then strain by means of a firm bandage above, and recommence the suction cups to suck without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, it is necessary that you strain it tightly; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good; if not; then recommence the application and cloths and linen and suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the displacement of woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and there comes forth some papers as .i. grains of resins, and it is esperantauble to see; therefore if you saw it covered, the work is such that you put an awl in the root of the lower part until that of above, then put another awl where there is .i. double thread of the edge of the lamier; and let it pierce, and leave the first awl according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then extract the awl and put on the oiled linen half in a basin of egg; and leave it until the threads fall with the grape, then cure the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and at times the wound is restrained by the grape each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show a great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula which comes from the oil, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter in this way; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye's cavity
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease that is called “alcunnati” is nothing but a bowing of the eye which is assembled in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a seat equipped and straight, then take the head between your hands of II parts, and move it as much as you see the bowing come up to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend and be discombree the light, and let the patient see things as he soloit; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bowing is not equipped as we have said.  
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and scrape on the cornea with the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, until the bow is issued; and when it is issued, distill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	of the eyes' waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the similarities of saws in division, and what is necessary to examine them; so in work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie his healthy eye and hold it very tight; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left, or in your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument that is called “almagda,” or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a finger in that white part of the eye to the side of the less tear, then thrust the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and return your hand until it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the full extent of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument up to where the liquid is, then express it below one way after another.  
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest a little, and if the water ascends the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ens fixed and she does not mount, extract almagda gently by turning your hand poc and poc; and then put back in water a poc of seil gemme, and leave of this the oil inside. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by means of a soft cloth or padding soaked in rose oil and yolk of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. 
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put up a certain crushed powder with abundance of egg. 
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you prick the instrument that is called "alberit," from which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce therefore the conjunctive alone, and do not go too deep in it, but make it fine, then put almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, equip the patient with bedding next to him, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be free from all movement, and eat light meats, and do not move your head neither right nor left, and let it be bound according to its position until the third day; then untie it in this same dark house, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not proper that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bind it because the liquid rises quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When an abscess comes, that you open the eye before the seventh day, and the address of those who soothe abscesses; and when it is calmed, then unseal the view and put on its face a small cloth to cover for any day, and be in that dark house. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he leaves the house little by little, and converts himself into his cases; and know that none of disciples ought to interfere in this case. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almond piercing, so that one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of the almond, for those who do not know them they see; and be of grain properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of these be of the same subtlety, and the last in three angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone onto the hip
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	At no time are born or come together various joints, because of which there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet; and if there are any such, where flesh is cracked of a bad color, and if flesh has a good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that therefore of these carts which is not sore, and not split open, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the syringe into those carts, and the air out; then cut what you can sustain with the sharp subtle spatula on one part, until you know that this cart is entirely removed.  
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains which one cannot cover, it opens everything, i.e., with instruments subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and if without a tear or abscess is sewn, or the secort as it is necessary; and if it are malignant abscesses, then haste and cauterize them until the blood is extinguished and all the pus is removed, then put on a clean cloth and water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose works, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is flesh new in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut: therefore it behooves you to put I a thread of linen about one finger thick, and be wet with hands well, and have between each knot an interval of the size or less; and put the patient’s arm into the nose at its opening, and pull gently until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times children do this in school, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold one end that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel each alternately as they are wrapped around the string. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as long as you know that the lice have corrupted that flesh, then treat the child, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it straight back into the wound as before; do this for 3 days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the wound a poultice of flax for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, for which one distills the oils and medicines into the wound.  
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a candlestick, and conduct it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed candlestick, and let the instruments be full to cleanse the head; and have .i. handle at the top for holding when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the bone onto the hip
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a sickness called "telul" is born at the joint of the hip, and it grows and becomes very large until it is a visible thing to look at; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, and all bone must be removed, then put on its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays in cutting it until it is large, he takes warning if it is hard, of dull color, of poor feeling: do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it any time, it brings great evil to the sick person; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dull color, and you see that one can cut it all, then empty the sick person and cut it without fear, and cure the place with things drying and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the hip is cut and sewed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these worked cartilages, it profits little because in no men.  
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary when this happens to any one, if it is looked at that the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then adjust the two lips with a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already opened on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then assemble the two lips with a suture, and restrain them, and powder on top of dragon's blood powder, and ground incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong plasters or other soldering plaster, and let it stay until it falls off by itself, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitch is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In men's mouths often happen within the lips abscesses hard, seeming like grains of mustard, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each pustule, and take with tweezers and chop in each part; then apply to the place after incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood be stanched; and then the ointment of honey, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times flesh grows on the gums, that the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and leave to clot the wound or blood; then put on the place powdered vitriol, or other powders astringent and drying; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which happens often, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are smelly; so it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands, and his chin be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until there remains nothing; and thus do of the blackness and the greening, and the jaundice and other spots, until they are cleansed; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those no, so it starts again to re-remove the second day and the third, until you have all removed; and know that the teeth need different forms of instruments for removal, according to what the work shows them, because the scraper used to remove outside teeth have other forms than those used between teeth; and these forms and others be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you wait for the drawing as much as you can, because one must not do it badly; because it is a substance very high until then one has no excuse to remove.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore when the patient is constrained to treat, it behoves you to be certain of the tooth aching. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient, and believes it to be a tooth saint, and makes milk the good tooth; and nonetheless departs not the pain by this, as long as the evil is strained, for we have already done so to these saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth aching, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with all i. spatumile strong to keep the gum from all parts; then move it to your two or tweezers subtle at the first point and point, as long as it is well loosened, then I affirm it well the pliers; and let the head of the patient in your saint between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out fully, take one of these instruments and put it inside each side gently, and move it as you did first. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, then it is necessary to fill it with sponges, where the holes are; and if you extract it carefully with tweezers, so that it does not break when extracting it; and it is necessary very skillfully to work around the gum in order to dislodge the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And therefore well guard that you do not break it, and remaining a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take heed that you do not act as the ignorant physicians do, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the cartilage, and bring them not what we have recounted; but bring forth sometimes by the opening of those great illnesses for the roots that remain there, or for the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or oil and salt; and if a discharge of blood comes, which often happens, apply to the place vitriol ground; and if that does not work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, to which one must use teeth first, be at long points and thick handles, that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be of well-made iron, and be toothed for gripping firmly.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the breast, it is necessary that you put over it cotton moistened with butter for one or two days. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the eyes are moist, put in the tongs that are called “algefri,” so that the head seems like a bird's beak; and be made inside as much as a file and this is the form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, because of this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with this, it is good; if it does not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two teeth, of which is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front in the direction of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like a large pair of pliers, whose shape is here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find for themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others and if one does not break the bone or other bones, or it can, then search for the instruments that are needed, that I have told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable to this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the shape is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it behooves you to know if the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it or file it; therefore the rake; and if it is attached with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to .i. small beak, and let it be of sharp iron at its tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping bit by bit in hands for a few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and for those you do not move others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then the file of a piece like this is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used to make needles; and in filing the tooth bit by bit over a few days gently, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plane at the end without any ridge, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then it is necessary to file the roughness until it is equal, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front loosens, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he does not bite, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and it is of no use; then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and be the thread medium, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see fit to bring together the teeth, then take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the cheek between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you come sagely to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move; and be your ligation at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. 
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the bones of the jaw with pliers and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it tight as much as it can remain, and if it unties, or the wires come loose, restrain it with another wire; thus it remains and serves for its entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see: 
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, then one puts it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and suffering, and at any time one makes the shape of a tooth from the bone of a calf, and one puts it in the place where the lack is, and one restrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No times is this ligature that comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a joined wound; and the works are such that you work the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous tie wide, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is from the joining of a wound, so put the probe and cut wide that ligament; and keep that the cutting be not too deep, for the artery which is below; and when you have done, then lift the place with rose water and oil, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and stitch the sick person each night, that the places may not close. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the flow of blood comes, then place on the place powdered vitriol; and if the bleeding does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.  
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of fiery color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then place the probe, and make it with a subtle spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the blood does not stop at your work, put on top vitriol ground until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw everything out; then raise the level of assil and seil, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come from within the throat lumps which are called «godath», and they call them properly the II almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, if you take care: if it is abscesses hard of little sense and color, do not touch them with iron. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood; but leave it until it is mature, and then you will split it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color, appear the instrument to cover, but first see if the abscess boils and rests. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore make the patient sit before the sun, and his hips be in good health, and he open his mouth and the surgeon places the instruments between his hands, and presses the tongue down with all the instrument, for this is the form; and be it of silver or steel as well as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the oncine and stick it in the almond, and drive it upward more than you can; and do nothing of the cloths with, then cut with the instrument, from this is the form, that seems a forces; and anyway the chief are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron inde or d’andainne:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, cut it with pliers, from this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be trenching on one side, and on the other part name; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and ease, and if there is a discharge of blood, gargle the patient with water, or grated pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then treat it until it is healed; and at no time when other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them like the two almonds always.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was within her throat, that is to say the abscess of little size; and I had well almost closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not expire by the conduit which was stopped, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus one day or two. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had to be opened two times through the two openings of the veins. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore did so, and put it in one incision, then the traitor was taken out, and there was a large portion of bowel removed; then I made another piece on the other side of the two incisions, and I worked the mouth and pressed his tongue; after which I put the incision into these abscesses, and in coped a part, and no more than a little blood came out; and thus the conduits of the throat were opened for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I engulfed it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and I know only what God did to her after me. 
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it comes back to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is somewhat thick and round, it is called "eye". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the chausses abscess is calmed, and it is subtle, then it behooves you to cut it; and the one that is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusse color or black, then it behooves you to eschew the incision of it. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great peril to the patient. 
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we have made remembrance before; then insert the needle into the grape, and draw it down, and the cup on one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. 
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears to have it cut, then you must use an instrument to cauterize the senses that cause fear. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp, acute. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy one, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in this chapter of cautery, and confides with lively water, so that it be neither too thick nor too clear; and by employing the end of this instrument, for this purpose is the form: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let him have his head a hair or one puts the medicine in it, as the men of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscles run from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the back; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it curdle and the bites of the medicine be appeased; and if you see, take cotton and surround it with any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the cane above, until the cotton hardens on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and fall after four or five days. And if you have need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then commence it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, or the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take wormwood and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or any of them in one pot, and put them therein, and let boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot have one instrument shaped as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it be of silver or of iron, and let one of the heads be put in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the uva by the vein, until the uva is mortified; after that begin again, as long as the uva dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the declination of the hot abscess. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a dog and put inside its head a wick of wool, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; because the wick of wool does not allow the vapor to burn the mouth, and it is a good cure together with salvation. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or spine of fish, or something else, lodges in the throat; so it is therefore necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the whole instrument, so that you may move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned into the throat, it is necessary that you make the sick person vomit as long as the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it will throw out the thing airy by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, it will lodge itself, and then you will pull it out; and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take one instrument of plank according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come into it, nor thrust in the bone; and it is better that the patient thrusts the instrument, because he knows whether the thing is harsh; if he pushes down, or he pulls up all of the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the bleeding of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes medicine is used for the bloodletting, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient to the sun, then that you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the hernia, then treat it with all small tweezers, or subtle forceps that are good for this. 
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this is not good, then take a dog's hair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put where the end of the dog's hair was on fire, and do this often.  
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient stands in water all day. 
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full the cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and lay it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the patient feels the water, he will fall.  
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times because it will certainly cure. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot or it has burning charcoal, and be the bottom covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that pierce the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cauldron in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not go out, but comes to the nose; and the nose will now run, and if it does not run, you begin the fumigation again many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and spits things salty and such, and do not drink water; and then the matter is necessary that it must come out by this governance. 
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument for treating the root is, when it can be seen, like tongs bent to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a bird's beak, and has sharpness from lime, so that when it takes hold, it cannot let go; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes after in this book, and they are diverse in puncture and size; and this is in two ways, one being in its same form, and of that which it holds moisture.  
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for the joints which are in the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the head is other than that of the foundation, and the abscess of the flesh is other than that which comes in the joints, and each one has its judgment in the work. 
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if on abscesses one should not probe, as long as the boil is mature according to its accomplishment; and if on some such ones that it is necessary to probe when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses which are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near the joints, and it is left as long as it is corrupted, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are putrid, so this is the cause of contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; if it is near the foundation, then pierce it so that it is ripe; and it is not necessary that you pierce an abscess crudely without completed digestion, except for the one which is near the foundation, lest it be too deep, and become lengthened inside, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and the redness, and the suppuration and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it depends most from the abscess, and where it appears to open more; and be the perforation long in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these things that are broken, according to that member.  
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is good that you let the perforation remain until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. 
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before these, the body of the venom will be extended from it, and it is full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and depths of it.  
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are felt according to the width of the body, according to what the members have need. 
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the heart, and cover; when it has become as I draped, and is softened, then it is necessary to do as one does with buboes: and if there are such that are cut in III angles, and if there are such that one copes like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the angres; and if there are such where one makes a round size, and other sizes and seeming cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	He who has no chief, as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce him plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, if do not milk all the pus in that hour, but drain one part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing straight; make this many times of great to great, until the pus is all out; same as if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit sometimes trembles with the exit of the bowels, which by chance kills the patient, and you don't worry about it. 
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, then wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat incision, administer pads of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a pad so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have sewn it together, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or lint scraped from linen without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then bone, and cure with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, so administer cold water and ease it, and moisten the bandage, and put on the bleeding site many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, administer government and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is in winter, and the place or abscesses is very nervous, then it behooves you to put upon tents and drapes moist with wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it behooves you to put on moist drapes in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, up to the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it behooves, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this it is necessary to know universally in cures of abscesses: or I have said how one must go before the cures of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where near the head come small abscesses, and are mannered as we that are in cloths, as well as the trellis of a vine, and much in them there are similarities.  
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such which have moisture as well as poultices; and there are some that are hard and stony at the waist, and there is no doubt if the artery does not go against it. 
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is that you prove all the instrument which is called "entromissoire," from which its form comes after, what thing it contains. 
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then raise it upward by its length. 
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, so scrape with nothing leaving the hair that contains that moisture, because it returns to where it was when you leave it alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and honey, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who have this remaining will cure.  
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then he begins the cotton again, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain in any dirt; then cure the wound with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in the fat, then cut according to this form, long; and put your tweezers there, and the skin around it, and put all your care into draining further the coat where it lies; and if the artery does contrary, then do what I have told you after. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same with an abscess if it is foul, and of its size and of its care as I have told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the tail on a pus abscess and the moist one is lighter because they have little blood. 
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and of these abscesses that I treated or chief of an old woman; and I found the abscess as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had tried to make any incision, one would have made him a wound as well as from a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or chief, for that which come at the chief of children and at the roots of ears, the opening so be all days to the most dependent place, for to let out the pus; and the cure as it is fitting. 
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come from other parts of the body, and they are bad, and they are intertwined with each other. 
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its side, like the boils and abscesses of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some who contain moisture, and there are some who do not want to obey health.  
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in that one then that you see of good disposition at the touching, and is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not hard to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not deep; so it is necessary that you cut it above, and the scrape of each part, and are the II lips of the heart as incisions, if you have need for it, as we have said in abscesses of the chief; and the trade prick and prick, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not be the spatula thick or trenching, that the hands escape, and see too forward, that you do not cut what you do not.  
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not stop bleeding, put in the wound ground vitriol, or some powders that restrain blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.  
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it; then if there remain any small scabs on your fingertip, cut them and remove them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if it has in the root of the scrofulous vein a great one, then it does not behoove that you cut that scrophula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound of old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining superfluity for the size of the scrofula.  
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it, and milk it out, and use it as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that hold superfluity, pierce there where it opens more; and pierce thus as the one before said, depending, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply the ointment cure to create flesh, until it is healed.  
de squinance	of a swelling
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen in our land who made it, and this is the scripture of their word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the slit of the throat which is called 'epiglottis' be evacuated; and do not help them by this, because all the veins and arteries of the sick are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two cheeks.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four a small cut through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut through the syfac, not in the cartilage; and this their si is convenient to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long.  
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it behooves him to extend the skin of the throat to all the hinge, then split the heart as long as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that it goes out through the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and sew entirely alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says one should not do this juice until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault belongs to the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are saved from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it has passed in III days or in IIII. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, as long as it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took the knife and stabbed it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe; and I was called by her to heal her, and I found her as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood which was issuing from it, and well that it had not pierced a vein nor been conducted further than the throat, and the veins were issued through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I bandaged it, and thus I treated the wound, and healed it until it was well; and did not happen to the girl except that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition; for this reason I say that in cutting the epiglottis there should be no fear. 
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a boil, and it is mostly in women; and it is according to II manners: natural, and accidental; where naturally has no engine. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to II manners, of which one is similar to fat for us, and the other manner is similar to abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not become to work to do fiercely except in this one that is small, and proves and searches all the intruder: if you find him as I fat, and cannot at any vein, so chop him, as one chops the fat, and treat him all his scalp, if there is any; and encircles well soon, and cures him as it befits, until he is perfectly sound.  
des nous	Of ours
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways of us are, which I will say all the resemblances; and now it is fitting that I say all the difference that is between our and issue. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is sometimes feverish and hot-bearing, as long as the boiling is not passed, and is completed the rotting; therefore rest fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new flesh there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the cyst, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a wound, and becomes swollen; and there are according to two appearances, or greasy, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the new [wound], that you feel and examine first with all the instrument that is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come or chapter which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses for us is that you prick or more moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two thumbs and thumbs, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it shall be according to the size of the abscess; then extract the entromissoire, and take care in those that jump out. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture runs short, what color it is, do it as I have said of other abscesses; and if after the probe moisture does not come, know that it is fatty, so do it in a cross, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side and ward the coat where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the probe; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, so draw it by pieces so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains there nothing, it returns to us many times; and if it remains a little, and the wound doesn't grieve you, apply to the wound some corrosive powders, sharp, and restrain the wound, and put above calming things, hot poultice, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the lump is great, sew the two lips of the wound, and cure it from what generates flesh.   
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is bleeding heavily or otherwise quickly, and you are in haste, apply a mixture of crushed vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound dries, and calms the flow of blood; then return to covering what remains.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the intrumental probes, and they are in 3 manners: large and medium and small; and there are 3 squares which are called “albaret,” and 1 that is called “breb,” and there are also in 3 manners: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like needles with which one sews sorceresses, and are of citrine gold, or iron, or silver, and the most valuable are those which are yellow, and they are more proved of black flint to surround the fistulas of curvature; and they are in 3 manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the openings.  
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the pincers are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are pincers that have two curves in three ways also; and there are pincers that have three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are pincers that have two curves, and pincers of a single curve only, and they are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these things is that one makes them sharp, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, with which one skins the veins, for that one does not cut the vein or the nerve; and of these intromissories are the alemeles put back in handles, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses; and they are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses them only in fleshy places, like legs, arms, nipples, and groin, and similar ones; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling fisticuffs, according to this form, with which one stops bleeding.  
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one puts it at times in the place which heals with a cutting of veins, and arteries, and at times returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like the breasts of a woman; and they remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to follow according to this form from this line .b. up to .g.:  
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if the swelling is low, and softened like it happens to women, so make it in two ribs above, by two similar incisions; so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and put therein what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remaining and fat, then cure it until it is healed. 
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous boils or nodules and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore who contain moisture ought to be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care of ointment before that as long as it is healing.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of a resemblance to scrofula, then treat it as we have said in incisions of scrofulas, and if the wound returns pus, then administer cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is wounded, and the skin is sewn which is above, there often comes abscesses, and it also happens to the vein inflamed and abscess; and if the one knows this way that it is for the artery, so the abscess long is made by him; and when you feel it in your fingers, you feel a tightness; and when it is for the vein, then it is red appearing outside; and it is folly to cover this abscess, even when it is below the armpits and arms and neck and in many other places, and is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and whoever is at the head it is also necessary to avoid it, and in the one who is inflamed with artery by above the skin of the long; then work the waist as soon as possible, and depart beautifully the artery from the fabrics, until it is discovered; then put under it a needle, and make it pierce up to the other side, and extract the artery of a double thread in II leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the II arteries that are in the temples; then point the place which is between the II ties of an intromissoire until the blood comes out of it, and be relieved the abscess; then administer the cure that causes bowe, as long as the tie sticks; then cure those who have ointment before these, until it is healed; and if the abscess is for the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there is the double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or tie of one of II parts as II chiés of the thread; and if you doubt that the threads are not issued, then put another needle to all the thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and extract the threads in IIII leagues; then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out of it, then cut the superfluity of the keur and leave what is tied; then put on top I drapeil moilliet in wine and oil, then administer them cures of tents and ointments until it is healed. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come in the nerves when they are overworked, or by too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips and in all the places where there are joints, and it is a grief abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions without pain; and when one restrains them forcibly, the patient feels pain, and is not at all in harmony with the body, but below the heart; and moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and the one who is in the joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would go contraction; and the one who is on the head or forehead, makes the skin to the spatula. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a string, and then scrape it, then pick it up and sew the wound together with stitches, and care for it until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	of large abscesses hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the belly and nowhere else; and it is a disease that is called “fungus” because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and the roots are subtle, and the head is large; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had fine roots, and they were slightly split, and moisture oozed from them. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI З., and the work in the incision is that you watch if the patient is moist, and the color of the little artery is white and moist and of subtle root; if the chop at the spatula wide, and be in your presence the cautery to fire. 
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the waist often comes too great a bleeding, and if it does not go well, then hasten therefore to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take the thread of lead well made, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the lead thread until it cuts the artery, and bleeds through it without working; and if the roots are large, you are afraid to cut even the same for the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the flesh which is of a pale color and poor in sense and milk. 
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	Because it is an abscess festering, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is healed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the abscess comes from cautery of a wound or fissure of the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind; and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the exit of the pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open of diverse issues. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed to its sides, it rises back up, and then returns, and by chance, it may be tightened, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and is bound according to a quantity; and if it is due to wind, it is sore to the touch, and the works are that you look at its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or vein, or wind. 
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary that you leave the care.  
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, then it befits that you command the patient to hold his arm, and let it be stretched straight, then reign in around the bulge; then command him to gesir sovin between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed to all the spatula, then extend the half of the abscess above to the whole great uncine; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the two ends be tied on each other; then operate the half of the abscess extended on the thread, and put your index finger in, and search the intestine; if you find it taken by the thread, then untie it, and put the intestine outside of the belly; and if you find the boil, take it at the uncine, and cut off the superfluity; and if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, then go well around, then return to your work and take II needles, and put II through threads, and put the II needles around what you have done in a cross that you make perceable; then strain the abscess in IV lengths on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as long as it will rot, and let the dead flesh fall away by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and rotting, then cure it of what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or the moisture that you find, then cure the place of what is necessary, and close the place. 
dou chancre	about the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the similarities of ulcers, and how one should work on them with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that ulcers are created in the marshes, and great caution is needed in their treatment, and ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer that is in the nipples, and in the groin, and similar places, and it should be completely removed when it is at its beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not appropriate that you approach it, because I have never healed any of them; nor has anyone else ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then prepare the patient's skin well to perform the operation; then cut out your ulcer or sore, and shave it all around, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and press the place firmly with your hand or any other thing, and if the flow of blood goes against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: so is revealed only; and one should not touch iron in these II similarities: that is to know, tympanites and hydrops, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this semblance of dropsy which is called “eclites” of medicines, and the cure does not profit, consider if the sick person is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and diarrhea and similar things; if you do not touch iron because there is doubt; and if you see the sick person of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus work: lift the sick person right up on your hands, and the minister presses the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the hip, then take the spatula spiny according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut from two parts. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	At the point, and nevertheless it should not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when you put it in, and you cannot bleach it; then look if the dropsy is engendered towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you fenestrate under the head III of two right below the armpit; and if the dropsy is for the disease of the liver, so be your incision to the left of the head III of two; and if it is for the spleen, so be it to the right, and it should not happen that the patient lies on the incision so that the superfluities do not run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the outlet, and raise your hand to the entire spatula between the skin and the syfac as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or like an inch; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the point eight, and this is the place of the water, then the treatment drive, and put this instrument for this reason:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver needle, and it is made of iron or lead light, and at the bottom part there is I small hole; and on one side it costs III holes; and II on the other side, and I on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the chief above is the alemele, so that when the instruments comes to the point, it descends now on the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than it is fitting in that hour, by adventure the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls faint, or he approaches to death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the point, and it is retained now by the heart which stops the leak which is on the siphon, for this that I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin again the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat from the point a little quantity; do this any day, and keep yourself from following until there remains not more than a bit of point. 
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt on the patient, and give him much water, so cure him with a burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and keep him from drinking; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	At no time are children born who do not have a hole in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary, then he must perceive all of the spatula very finely according to this form:  
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put or through it a thin cloth of flint, and bind it and keep it so for three or four days and when he wishes to urinate, remove the clot, and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it does not come about, because the urine which comes forth does not leave it closed. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The one whose wound is small, if it is medicated with the cloth of lead as we have said, then it will widen. 
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the penis in its place are pale, because none are born with the penis at the head of the shaft, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the opening, and this is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies supine on his back, and they support the head of the penis and the scrotum as if it were a feather, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and beware of bleeding which often comes from it, and if it happens, have someone who stanches blood stanch it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these blisters come in the penis, and it is a bad appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to pick them with one fine needle, and scrape and cleanse them all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the boil is malignant, of bad color and pus, then you must bring fire cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have grasped it, and if the [bone] is in its socket and part inside and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the [bone] which is inside first; and when it is united, then you care for the outside. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car when you treat it together, make sure the head of the stick is not pierced, and black rot and corruption come in its shaft and at the groin; so it must be cured all that is black and corrupt, then put a layer on the wound made from honey and flour which is made from peel of quince trees and myrtle, then treat it with other dressings until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps with two things together: namely, bloodletting and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must put or lead from the penis a chain of wool, and urinate on the patient among; and when the skin is raw at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with the instrument's tip, until the bonds are untied, and the head of the penis is delivered on all sides; and if it is a painful thing to discuss this, it is necessary that you scrape it with the spatula some point at the head of the penis and the skin; then separate well between the two, and put the subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not dry.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of continuity; however, when we do this work of our will, and properly to children, it is necessary that we make the best possible work and the most light for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the most greatest part of the masters and the healers who made circumcision around .i. dal, and as forces, and to one whole novacule; if it was the keurs for he has .ij. toiles, and by adventure if one chops this above and remains that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it is convenient to cut, and is the pain double, and to the purification which is dou dal is not assured the tip of the member; and to the purification of the knuckle by adventure escapes the iron, and runs the work, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the modification which is made as forces to all the linen of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, so that it is equal in all, but that the thread be well laid in the skin; and that the manner of the first work is such as you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not force him to bind the thread around the shaft only, and then make him rejoice in all manners that you can; then make him be between your hands straight, and retort the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or heart, and bring it up until the head of the shaft is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then bind the place with a double thread, then tie it below I with another thread; and hold as II does by the second link to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the II links, then raise the heart above gently and treat the head of the shaft; then leave him to let blood little by little, because that is the cure; and put powder on and on the powder I drape it with a half of a boiled egg tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and cure it from other cures until it is cured.  
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces to the mundification is this: the two shoulders are held and are pointed, and the shoulders are also as large as the hands equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundification is when the pliers inside are at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger so that the lead makes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take tongs, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pierce for .iij. days, and what is below the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscess has calmed, and lightly peel it; then cut as much as you can move, and guard the part of the rod, it will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound with powder, that we have said or treated about powders, and if one cuts too much with the pliers, and it goes upwards, it will not harm; cure therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is from a stone in the bladder, or blood congealed, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is at the bottom or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on their knees; and that his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the top towards his back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone upwards, so that the urine is relieved; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", from which this is the form: and be of fine silver, light tip, like the feather of a bird; and be the shaft one palm long and a half, and be fine at the top. 
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubine of egg, and make the patient sit on the seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water; then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the scrotum; then put the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient come until the void thing, and this is not done according to this order for that because the conduit or where it goes is twisted; then extend the thread to all the wool head and head, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and do correct the urine; and restart the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned. 
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalds or blood comes in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see it distilling waters and medicines, so do it with all the instrument which is called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and if it has III openings: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and the lead should be such that the medicine stops well the rod without addition, so that if one can drain the moisture, and squeeze when necessary; and when you want to introduce your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the clyster in the moisture, and pull at the tube that is inside; so you will draw the moisture into the clyster, and then strongly push the tube back inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder: this is it: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And is of silver or of copper, and is the head higher; and below to the chest where the ligaments fall; then take a sheep bladder and put in it the moisture that you see to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a good double cord, and heat the pouch of moisture on the fire; then put the tip of the clyster into the rod, then strain your hand over the bladder with all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it the circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put the strong cord into these holes, then assemble the circle like one assembles the spindle, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work by size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens more to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hard, and pains the patient's penis, and he feels it many times, and then becomes soft; and with many of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they have four years, and it is very painful in the elderly, and is as the middle for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by clyster, to draw out all the mucus which is in the intestines.  
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he often encumbers to seek out the stone.  
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and loosen and move them downward so that the stone descends to the end of the bladder, and it comes out once from its place; then make him sit between your hands properly, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is all declining down; then feel and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut above the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall to the touch of all, then moisten your right index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your right middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it in its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your right finger, aim at the bladder's neck; then press upwards on your right finger, and put it out in the direction where you want to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then push the spatula cutting, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And place between that which is between the buttocks and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be right above the stone, and those two should be wide or foundation, and let the waist be traversed so that it is wide outside and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large; perhaps the press on those who are or foundation, that she leaps out without work; and know that there are some stones which have angles, and margins: if it is cut a little; and if it is like one which is swollen, and rounded, whose issue is light.  
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	To those who have angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not open, it is necessary that you extract it with tweezers that are like a file at the head, in order to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engage it thus, then enlarge the small opening of the passage, and if it does not come out, strain it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, first put the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then push the larger one through, and the smaller ones afterward if there are many. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be treated, and make a larger wound. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For II things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through where the wounds cannot close; but nonetheless, you force to draw it out, or to break it with pliers, until you draw it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and put on top the cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, cleanse the area well with oil and water, then treat it with diaphicon ointment and basil ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if a boil comes in the wound and corrosions, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and by this retained urine, which is known in such manner that without jumping with the urine: therefore you must put it in the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and it will rot; then lift the wound with water and honey and silk, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is located in the urethra, and tied in it, and the urine cannot issue; so the cure of these things, as I say, that you cut it many times, and there is an excuse for the cutting by this cure.  
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proven this thus.  
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron according to this form and be three corners hooked into one stick:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the forest in the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the forest with your hand in the stone, point by point, until you can feel the stone on the other side; so urine will soon come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is immediately broken, and jump out with the urine, and heals the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and the other above, then make the rod in place of the stone between the two threads, then extract it further, and untie the two threads, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed. 
de la piere des femmes	of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that a stone is engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, the cure is grievous, and it is forbidden for .iij. things: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a knowing woman who will uncover herself to look at the stones, even when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, which is why it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is. And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you take a midwife well-knowing, and at pains find one, and if you do not find one, point do not desire; cast a mire subtle; and present her a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command her of the inquiry of the stone; and regard well whether the woman is a virgin: therefore it is necessary to put her behind or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it below her behind, and recommend that she put her behind or on the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming. 
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she move it from great to small from the entrance of the bladder until below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it appears to be moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her waist above or below the stone, and let the tail be first small; then put the loin into the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as much as the stone can go out, and know that many ways of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and soft, long and rounded, and which have reins. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the appearances to know the outcome. 
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the stone does not come out, put ground vitriol on it, and hold it for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is in place, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones in men so that they can help you in your work; and if the stone does not come out, and it is from the artery which is cut, put the powder on the spot and hold it with bandages and dressings, and do not start again those things, and leave the stone and do not extract it any more, lest the patient die; then cure the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the limbs are numb, then return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous ramice is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is the substance from the center of the testicles that contains the egg; and it is called “syfac,” and at times it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e., another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and those have this point not.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the buttocks, and this moisture has many colors: either it is declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, then the abscesses reopens,  like a loaf of bread, and does not open the buttocks, because it has moisture all around. 
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscesses are covered with part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the glans and the foreskin, then it is felt well; therefore when you see know the color of the moisture, then suspect to all the introducer quarrells, because the form is before. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his ability and the repletion of his body; then lie him on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the armpits; then take the spatula lightly, and cut the skin of the armpits among them long until below the elbow, and let the cut be straight dividing the skin of the armpits until the white fascia, and carefully scrape according to your ability; then pierce the fascia plain of water at a wide opening, and extract all the water, and then put your swabs, and extend the fascia upwards; and do not touch the heart of the armpits, but only the fascia; cut all or by pieces equally the bone from him subtly, that if you don't cut it well sagely, he will return the water; and if the weft jump in your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the fascia; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the armpits at a seam, then cure him as other wounds, until it is healed. 
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another malady, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the flowing of blood; then cut the point to all the suspender, and extract the ulcer, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen half soaked in rose oil; and put outside another piece of linen soaked in wine and oil, and put on top of the two cushions, and put above doubled cloth, and tie it over the entire bandage that is according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two strips, and use them of wool charpie according to this semblance and be assembled by stitching in the waistline of the breeches, and one of the heads prickles above the foundation up to the back, and the other on the side of the armpit; and the other two chief over the two angles, and be all assembled the restraint in the buckle of the breeches; and once is medicine this branch of cautery in place of a steel knife, and it is that you prick the cautery cultellar subtle, and cut the skin of the scrotum, and be scalded as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains water is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery: 
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cope in all the manners that you can, as long as you scrape everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more safe; and move guarding of a decrease of blood, and moves that the works of size; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscess cauterize or decrease of blood or other thing, so cure what makes you contrary, according to what is before said. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I have told you; and when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the watery root is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below with all the spatula wide, and put the perforation to the long one of the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the spot and bind it, and leave for it to drain the remaining water, then cure it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow out at the mouth of the wound, then you should pour in a pen or instrument with which one treats the water from dropsy, of which the form is above; and widen the hole of the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or until it heals, and when it is assembled as before, and so will pass the days of the patient.  
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, so I seem to you it is best to leave it; and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the joints; and this is for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by superfluity sour and acute, which is spread to the joints, or by percussion; and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and it is a serious abscess; and by adventure there are some abscesses grievous fearful and stony, and of fuze color, and at times comes from the outside of an artery, or from an inflammation of the vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by the artery, then it is known by the arrangement of hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it is not fitting that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and can well make the size on this appearance, and on the other charrs; and it is that you cut the core of the veins, then the egg is in the top, and the trail fur of the white syfac, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already cooked with these kinds of nees, then it behooves you to draw out the egg, and chop it; and if it is airs at the syfac, or in that which is within the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver all of that, and chop it roundly. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the cartilage is at the rear or front, it behooves you to cut it entirely, and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the works are accomplished, then apply the wound to wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cover it with other dressings until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling the burgeon, with the softening of the boils, and the patient cries out when he walks; and the cure for this disease is as terrifying as the one before it, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.  
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It behooves you to make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the suspensory of the testicles down towards his hips, on all the vessels that are near the penis, and have the masters cover them, and stretch them forth; then cut with the sharp spatula wide through the middle between the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then put a needle where the thread is double, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come, and tie it straight to the other end; then cut them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupted moistures; then cure the wound as with others where one injures a bowe, so that no vessel leak that nourishes one of the testicles; for through these no evil comes, and if to all the vessels comes blood, it behooves you to drain the testicles in all the vessels; so that the toes do not lose their nourishment for the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be aided. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the hip
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The happenings of this ailment are by the section that comes or where it's located, or the extension on the belly in the part of the flanks, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners; and this rupture is either of the syfac, or of the extension of it, and these II manners of much causes: whether by percussion, or jump, or fall, or lifting of heavy load, and similar things; and the signs when it's of the extension of the syfac, are that they come poc and poc, in long time, and doesn't come suddenly; and the abscesses are even until near the parfont, for which the syfac presses on the intestines. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the pus, that it brings a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse, under the skin near, and this because of the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the pus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes these (abscesses) touch with the intestine, and are held in, and cause great pain to suffer to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to bring the intestine to his hand inside the wound, if he can enter it; then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips; then raise the heart above, and cut all the skin of the groin from long; then put into the folds of the waist needles according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the eyes may issue; then scrape the fascia that is below the skin of the groin, until the white fascia is uncovered on all sides; then put your index finger in that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white fascia which is under the skin of the belly, and between the second fascia, and depart that which is behind the belly, and between the second fascia; and then move with your right hand inside the heart of the groin, and keep the white fascia on top to your left hand, and raise the belly towards all the fascia towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the belly upwards, and untie what is behind the ligament; and examine with your fingers if there is no intestine enclosed or white fascia hard, and if you find any of these things, put it into the belly below; then take a needle which has a thick thread made of X threads, and put it in the back part of the fascia, which is after the skin of the groin; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are IIII threads; then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the fascia, of which we have said that it is below the skin of the groin, with a strong thread of II parts; then enclose the hairs of the threads, and tie them together in the form of II parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except for pus which does not come; and put the thread straight according to the first long thread of II parts, and after these II threads leave the fascia which is below the heart of the groin the length of a finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the belly carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the groin, as much as the sinew, and the bow, as we have said before; then bring moistened wool in oil, and put it into the wounds, and put on the thread that we have said. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the white groin that we have said cauterized after the incision, out of fear of a decrease in blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the thread hang until it dries through; and if it delays in drying, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it dries; then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this practice, I never saw anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the twig which is assembled with the branch, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below; then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who operate, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	At no time comes a rupture in the angles, as we have said, and opens the eyes; and do not insert any of the intestines into the anus, and if there are any inserted, it is little, and repairs all hours; and anyway, if it remains too long in this point, it believes the wound or syphilis, until the intestine emerges; and this happens because of the extension of the syphilis which is in the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen the eyes and opens; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and at no time is cured by iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies soundly on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated with a width according to the quantity of III does; and then extract the syphilis which is under the skin that the usual one, then take the root and put it on the place appearing of the syphilis; and press it at the full length of the belly, then stitch the II places appearing of the syphilis onto the head of the root, and stitch them both; then extract the head of the root, and do not cut the syphilis or extend the web or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramice of the intestines; then cure by the cure of wounds.  
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, then make him understand and care for the wound until it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The thigh is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles softens in certain men, because the contents within are softened, and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin which is softened over the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you see it, first sew the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four sutures firmly; then cut between the sutures, and cure it like other wounds, until it is healed, and tie the thread.
dou chastrement	of the cauterization
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that chastisement is common in our law, and for this reason I would like that I speak not of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two manners: one of which is that the wise men know how to answer when they are asked, and know how to cure; and the other, because we often need chastisement from some beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cattle and other beasts. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I therefore say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. 
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, make the beast sit in hot water until the joints are softened and pliable; then take them in your hand, as long as they are put back and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the chastisement of tail: it behooves you to hold the beast and press its skin with your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut on each end at a point, when you will have well scraped them; and leave no prickle or subtle prickle that is on the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is better than that which is done by attraction, for that in attraction nothing remains perhaps from the testicles, so the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to II manners as men: one is if between the II sexes it opens as well as the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. 
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and it is on the pubic bone as well as a shaft and two bones.  
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of man and woman is that you cauterize all the joined parts, and cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure. 
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a char attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure.  
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you take the superfluity of the tissue with your hand or tongs, and cut lightly; and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not come, then cure it with another cure until it is healed; and in a different way that arises at the mouth of the marsh, and the temple, and perhaps jumps out, and is according to the semblance of a cow, and for this reason they call it the ancients "cow disease". 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the origin, and cure it until it is healed. 
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by illness that it has come; or it is by a joint attached, or by a subtle or thick syfac, and is made in the middle, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever; and prevents conception, and pregnancy, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the bailiff. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stupefaction is approaching, so do at your two or at the side.  
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is with a subtle syfac, and it is near the two leaves, then hurry, and do this: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then extend the two leaves, until the subtle syfac is round, and is covered by the stupor; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie at home each day, so that she cannot move. 
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sty is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stuffing is of flesh, then suspend it to the  incision and the edge; and apply medicines that stop blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, a mixture with an egg yolk; then administer a piece of broad plank so that the wound cannot close; and thus for length, and apply a tent of dry linen; then be cured by other cures until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a new carbuncle comes in the flesh, it is to be covered according to this manner, unless it is an incured abscess. 
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is festering in the marsh, one should not touch with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division the resemblances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure.  
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and boils, when they are made deep in the flesh, and do not appear to the touch, except for the cauterization by iron. 
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, are those one can cure. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then hold the altar with tongs and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the fire for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and hawthorn and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and asafoetida, and apply a poultice on her back. 
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he endures it, it is good.  
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If this does not work, make an opening with the bellows on the back and breasts without hurting; then take linen and moisten it in juice of plantain or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply the bellows to the place. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, care for its place with ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and is similar to the harsh chief, so it should be covered as I have said in the previous; and then the care until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marshes
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of abscess come in the marshes, such as chancre and puss-filled abscess and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and more other diseases that I have said in the division. 
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary for me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marshes, which is not like abscesses that boil over; and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is thick at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not haste thyself to pierce, but let him rest until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats where he leans, and supports his back and places his feet toward the parts beyond the leg; and let his thighs be spread out, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then move him gently to the right side, and there administer the instrument with which one operates on the mouth of the abscess, so that what comes after is the form; and it is necessary when you see administering this instrument, that you first put the point in order to know the depth of the abscess, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and let it put the cone of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.  
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it soft with the hand, then it is necessary to cover it with a cloth at the head, on the spatula of lead; and when the bowe is emptied, then it is necessary that you put in the wound wet tents in rose oil, or in dry green oil; and put the tent further from the wound to the edge of the margin, and put outside over the margin and on the linen sponge washed with water or mallow be boiled; then cure after II days of oinement before this, until it is healed; and no time lift the margin and the wound by clistere of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long arctitis are cooked; then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is put back in its place, then you must be careful not to cauterize it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is first necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air: then she hastens the child to be born; therefore you know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the head first, and the second comes with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child comes forth quickly; because when it descends on its head, the second comes with it, and the womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.  
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes upon his feet, and comes forth from the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes upon his belly, or groin, and is turned by chance onto his neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary that the healer be wise and subtle in these things, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the fetus comes forth on its head by natural delivery, and the woman is laboring hard, and her strength is weak, then make her sit upon a saddle, or let the women hold her up; and anoint her behind with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs, the small spatula whose form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the secondine, and cut at its nail until the moisture that is inside it comes out; and hold the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer a clyster to the woman of fenugreek with sesame oil; then make her suck and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus now will the child come.  
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are coming out, it is necessary that you gently push them in and out; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on the seat, and lift her feet up; then tilt the seat onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the tipping; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the neck which is placed before, and extract the child, and reset evenly. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child on his feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon its feet, it is necessary to push them up; and then turn them back and forth, until they are even; then grip its feet and extend them back and forth. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Until he jumps to his hips, if you command him to take it, and make him sneeze by condition; if it works, may God will. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not healed as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have, say take a muslin cloth of linen, and oil of sesame, and melted wax, and grind all in the mortar; and put upon the nature of the woman within and without this ointment, then make her sit in a warm bath until under the ribs; and when she is softened beneath, make her a coliere of myrrh, and put it beneath, and let her remain an hour; then make her sit upon the stool, then make her sneeze and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently take hold of her belly, because the child will now jump.  
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, he places his hands fist and fist; then it is laid on its neck, and the feet hang down, and lying on the bed; and bends his hands fist and fist, and then takes his hands on his belly, and removes the cushions below, until she is prepared downwards; and if the child does not jump, he takes his feet and moves them forcefully, then moves the belly upwards, then puts his hands; and so the child fist and fist; and commands to the woman that she be in charge as long as the child jumps.  
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the delivery of the child which comes out with a broad hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It behooves to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed, and spread out her legs; then administer the poultice that I have recounted; and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on the stool, then try to bring back the hand; and let the child be according to the natural figure, and have her sneeze, and command her to suckle as long as the infant needs. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is fitting that the patient should hold his hand, then turn it back and forth, and the other gently; and when it is equal, he places it upon the nature muscle of height and oil, as we have said, then commands her to move back and forth; and when you have done this, sit her on the seat, and command her to strain; and she will sneeze.  
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all of the spine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to be in this manner to the whole back, so cut the back at your finger, until the moisture is emptied; and if the child leans upon his face and upon his neck, so cut out of the bud, that she not be held, and let the child die; then put the child inside, as long as you have put him as it is right, and command to the woman that she preens no time: then it will lightly straddle. 
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things, and they do not live, if it is possible to name them; I know that they should be multiplied, and they are severed by the soul which divides them, who is bound to the head; and sometimes they go out as naturally as all others, as we have said.  
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are pricking painfully, the treatment as we have said, and let the healer be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do thus as he will save them. 
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	At no time are they formed in the marsh I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage, and it is necessary that the bail knows all these, because by chance similar things happen; so do as it is necessary. 
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death; it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her shoulders be inclined down, and her legs raised; and the minister the sheet of II parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the belly with moist oils with muslin of althea and fenugrec and flaxseed, then anoint the hands with these oils and these muscillages; then put them into the belly gently, then desire the place where she puts the pins to be convenient to those, and take ward if the child is appearing that it descends on his head; if they put the pins in her eyes or in her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on feet, then they put it or prick and as sides; and it is necessary that he holds the pin in his right hand, and puts the curvature between his two of the left hand, and puts them to all his hand gently, and puts the pin in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the pin: 
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place against the other bone where you need it, so that the extractions are equal; and then make them equal in moving from one side to the other, so that it may be moved, and let the bones have teeth so that they may hold, as this is the form. 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if part of it remains, he anoints the joint with some of his oil and puts it in that part, and draws the other part; and if none remain, he places this ointment or higher and does so until it all comes out entirely. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you should wrap it on the drape, until it is whole; then cut at the joint of the foot or to the knife, and so it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and as with II feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's hip is large and it is strained at the exit, or it has a sharp chief assembled, then you must put the pointed spatula between your two, and make the chief and extract the sharp; or you can do it with the instrument which is called "almidach," because its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one; and in the same way do if the child has a great chief naturally; and then pull the bones apart with the pliers, and if the hip jumps out and it is strained with force, so be broken, until the moistors which is or worse exit; and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it as long as the moistors run.  
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the cavity is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is abroad in the belly or breast, then you must draw it out to the cloth wrapped around the hand; and make the belly or breast, as long as the moisture that is there corrects; and if the other member are taken away, and the head remains, then put the bail your hand into the midst of the mouth; and drag it up to the mouth of the fissure; then put the hook or pin in, and drag further; and if the mouth of the fissure is constricted because of a hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be labored; rather, moist and fatty things must be administered; and administer plasters, and seeds in soft and moist water.  
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then administer what we have said in a living child; and if one has no power, then treat it by parts, and leave nothing of the backbone. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if they administer to them what we have said in abscesses that come in the marshes; and if bleeding occurs, it is put into sharp restraining, and they are given other treatments. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been stillborn, then conceived another upon that one, and miscarried the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time she had an abscess in the wound, and it swelled so much that it opened and began to drain greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I pondered for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed a strong adhesive plaster upon it, and after some days one bone came out, and after some more days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, because this one whose belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I cauterized the wound, and in manipulating the bones, until the woman was in a better condition; and the woman stayed long like this, and it grew back a little of bone from its place; and I have not recorded this chapter further than because when the master finds an unusual thing, that he knows how to put aid. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here after comes the form of the forceps, how it is made in books; and at two turns at two joints of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns shall be more subtle of the restrictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the pipe should be of a large width, and the edge of the trees it must, and long one palm and a half; and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same pipe, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the muzzle to open when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, of its semblance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the semblance of pliers; and has II chiés II adjustments, as you see, one palm long, and II wide; and when you see opening the mouth with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down and legs open, then put the II adjustments adjusted together in the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand on all the instrument, as you have done with pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the girl does what she wants. 
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the eyes have appeared them, so much more hasty is the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her breath, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps through this, well is it. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this is not done, then take I a pot, and make I it pierced or covered, and I put therein herbs that may open the mouth of the marsh, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then place one end or opening of the pot in the mouth of the marsh, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh, and keep it there until vapors come from within the marsh; then I make it sneeze, as we have said.  
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second part jumps hastily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and there is no strength, then command the midwife that she moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in liniment of aloe, and then put it into the nature, and seek the second time; and when she has found it, she grasps it and extends it back and forth straightly, so that the marrow does not fall out during the extraction; but it should be moved lightly to right and left, and then pulled; so it will come and detach itself.  
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the marsh is tight, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, so guard that you do not use the milk; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marsh, that you tie it to the hip of the woman, then enema with ointment tetrafarmacon; if it will open and return, and come forth; but nonetheless, when it opens, there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and pales the sick person. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary fumigations suitable for that: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the second thing is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And is to see the appearance of a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire; and let the fumigation be on the coals, and the tar as long as it is wasted, and begin another.  
de percier lou fondement	to consider its foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped with a subtle syfac: so it behooves the midwife to pierce that syfac at its due, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard the bandage so that it does not touch; then put a soft linen cloth in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until it is healed.  
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not close up again, then put on a poultice of flax, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go into the chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stoppage comes from a swelling of a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that swelling: if it is cured, as we have said of the cautery of pitch.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodules, and larger ones that come from near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is a fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it works, and still moist moisture awakes white or subtle bowe, and sometimes these fistulas disappear; and they are known by those who have them for excretion or venting when the patient makes an excretion, and perhaps in jumping some.  
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and reach to the joint of the groin, and to the root of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing to the foundation, and not passing: and it is that you put your thumb or foundation, and put a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.   
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is torsion, then it puts in a tent of fine silk or horse hair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through purgation or flatulence or pus, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or to the urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes up to the place; if there is no torsion and the invention of pain around, then there is an abscess, and there is no worth of medicine or healing by ointment; and in these piercing fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and vanity of foolish wonders who intervene. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one who is neither very young nor very old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined to his belly; then put a tent of linen, or of fleece if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes.  
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it near the base, then you must put your index finger there, and feel if the finger touches it; and be uncovered where you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then you know that it is pierced; if you do not work upon it, one cannot heal it. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One says however that one can well heal none, but this happens rarely; and the help that one makes, if one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and thrusts it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near the foundation; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred hairs are burned, which are like a feather of an eye; and then cure with wet bandages in butter, as long as those hairs exit, then cure with ointment healing flesh and joining. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If so it is healthy, well. 
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is the case, it cannot be healed in any other way; and if it sticks between, and does not pierce to the depth which is the foundation, and between your two depths and the tent a thick covering of flesh or of fat, and you see the fistula at this covering following the heart; so cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward the tent, and then apply the cautery after, as long as it comes to the head of the tent; and will be delivered the tent, and fall away; then remove those faults of flesh that seem like a feather of an owl, and none remain. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood vein goes wrong, and it comes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Because the fire cauteries assemble II good things: that is to know, the burning of these joined bones and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then the cure of damp wounds in butter or in crushed herbs, as long as the skin remains soft, and if the joins are burned in the softness; then cure the wound of solid suppurations by enclosing hard flesh, and they are dry medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the root of the foundation, and is removed from the body, then you put your finger or foundation there, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between there is the cloth or the syfac or chariots, where it is near to piercing, if there are no other means than by way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure it as first; and do not go too much in depth, that you do not cut the tenement that holds the foundation, and the egestions come by the voluntary will; then cure, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the mund after it is cut from its foundation, or by tent or by another pointed instrument; then defuse the char fautree which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation: it will be a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or on the side of the foundation near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: 
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he puts one thread wrong in two, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, just as you place your hand or foundation; and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it rest for a day or two; and restrain it no time, until the threads cope those carts that are between two, and stick together; then cure the wound until it is soldered and healed.  
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not become to make for the lacing cover if too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinal spatula used to make a fistula is very hard on one side and trenchant; and on the other side no, because for that reason one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here. 
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhages are according to II manners: or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, a little blood, and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are outside have less moisture, and still a little of clear water or a little of blood, and have the color of the body; and the cure of those who have them inside the foundation, is that you command the patient to stretch himself to go into chambers, as long as the foundations come out, and appear the filaments; if haste, and can hold it with tweezers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots; and if the pincers cannot hold it because of its moisture, take it with the sheet, or with cotton, or a piece of felt; and remove it to your fingers, then cut it, and powder above some hot powders that are in its place of cautery; or you cauterize it as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure the other cures until it is healed; and if the foundations cannot come out, you give the patient a purgative and harsh enema to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly; when the patient stretches, and if the filaments are outside the foundation, the cure is light; and it is that you take them with your finger or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until it is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. 
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one thread and put it into a needle, and then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood; then place on top of the foundation a soft cloth in rose oil or in cerate, and place on top, and command the patient to rest; and then let it rest until they are dry, and when they are dry, cure them with ointment and other cures, as long as it is healed.  
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the drying of the veins or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a drying up of veins in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you reset to the point of a spatula or your fingernail the bark above, which does not let it moisten; then treat it until it is closed as it should; and if it cannot close, restart the scraping stronger than before, until it heals well, and is barked; then treat it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	when it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small appearance, false before the body, and go much into it; and sometimes it is found cold, and feels one as though dead from trembling, and comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than elsewhere. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a stick of an goose feather, or a powerful vulture feather, and put that stick on the wound, until the purple circles reach all around the wound; then turn your hand over the entire stick until you cover all around the wound, and place it in depth, and scrape the wound from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this of a dog of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and long above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for must keep to the two, and move pressed And if you see, so cauterize the edge, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No time made one enema of silver or lead, or iron melted or woven; and no time is made of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore those who are administered in the cure of the children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, small and large, so it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And there is an incision where the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and on one side it has two holes, and on the other one; and the belly is where one puts the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there is one space, then put in these holes a strong thread of twisted thread X or whatever around, and assemble the belly as it is a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie the strap in front with a strong thread, then give a clyster; and this is the form of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk or something similar, then insert it gently; then squeeze the minister's hands together until it is all visible, then withdraw the clyster, and lift the patient’s legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it flow as much as it can; and if he sleeps a whole night after, it will be more of a help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him in the sickness of belly falling, and the medicine hastens to spread, so begin again until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or abscess, then use the clyster as subtle as for a child; and that is the shape of the subtle clyster on which the skin is restrained: 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the strike of a stone, and the size of a sword and knife, or lance or staff or dart, or similar things; or that are done according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or belly, or liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you are careful it is of gallstone or similar things, and the skin is immediately torn and the wound is large, and you doubt greatly an abscess hot: so make it bleed immediately from the cephalic same as if it comes a little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be contrary to the part numbed; and avoid the patient's repletion of wine and thick meats. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat be diminished, and he shall not drink wine, nor shall he eat meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in styptic wine; and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh to all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if it has moved, put on some ointment until he is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a cut from a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tenting, then assemble them by stitching, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is open to the bone, and hangs, and holds only by a thread, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked barley, as well as poultry, and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a rotting skin, and it reaches the bone, so cut away all the rot, and throw out its filth, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put into this powder which binds as soon as the arsenic has healed it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood II parts; quicklime III parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and strain it well, until it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time is this made with only quicklime, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the heat has cauterized the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the one who cuts has made a wound, even in being so, then don't put on this powder; but put some dressings digested, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it swells. Then cure with other cures until it is healed. 
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers; and I will tell you here afterwards about the fractures of the head. 
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other thing to leave the cure, and do not put anything restraining, because it harms the nerve and makes them retreat; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of this is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be the medicine warm, such as calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucum root also washed in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then sew it and bind it with bandages, then tend to it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is hollowed out and full of bowe, pierce or lower there; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes, then cauterize it, and close it up, and cauterize as necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the vein, and the conduit is kept, so that the flesh goes, sew the heart above the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural form; and then restrain it well, and leave it some days, then cure with ointments as long as it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then set it; and if there are pieces of bone, take them out all that you can, and those that you cannot have, then let them be until the wound rots and is cleaned up; and if the wound is fresh, then put powder on top of the powder that I said. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, see that from the wound no wind is escaping as the patient breathes; know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it tight to keep the blood from flowing out, and returning to the heart, and saving the patient; but put attractive ointment on it, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck up the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so that no spasms, nor bad tremors of the heart, nor any pain in the chest come; and when you see good signs, then know that the wound is saved. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure therefore of tents and other dressings, as long as it is healing; and if it cannot heal, and operate, then know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.  
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then treat it as those in front; if it is large, sew it; and if it is small, use powder; and if it is embedded in bone, and has broken pieces, then clean the wound, and remove the fragments if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound rot so that it will lighten the extractions; and for other wounds on other limbs, follow the judgments as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	about the displacement of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; from the great wound sometimes the intestine or the nerves of the intestines come out, because of which the introduction of others; and the suture is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse the small wound than the large, because one puts back the intestines more easily, if one does not put them back hot in cold; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they go back in more easily, and because of this, the medium wound is worse, because one must reset the intestine to its place like the others II And know that the rupture of the belly is according IIII ways: the II common sutures happen in the suture of the belly, and the suture of the other wounds of the body and II other sutures proper are common to the other wounds; and nevertheless they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will say one each and declare. 
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the entrails is outside, and it is a good thing to close it, this is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed due to the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only, or you boil in hot water thyme and cypress and spice, and apply the interior as long as the inflammation is removed; and sometimes do this restrainingly, and let it be moved that only to deflate. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or ale and make sure that they are cooked well, for by this is aligned the entrance to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a hole in the wound with the instrument of which one cuts hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to be more than the tail, which no one should cut without great need; and this is the instrument to split: so cut inside in the curve and outside not, and see here the form. 
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are pushed out, put it back in place according to its natural form if you have the power, because this heals. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then put your attention to that the sunken part be higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and medium wounds.  
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, place what has appeared to you, then put in your hands the minister who holds all the rupture with his hand, and assemble the lips; and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you prick an awl or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound I a distance, and there insert an awl where there is the good strong thread; and pierce the II chiez dou cuir with the II chiez dou siphac, which is under the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the II chief dou siphac the IIII together; then strain a double thread around the awl of II parts, then assemble the II chiez de la plaie avenanment, and then leave I a distance, and there insert another awl; then tie the end of the thread as you did the first awl, and do not cease to do so according to what you need of needles, until the whole wound is constrained; and let the needles be medium, between subtle and thick, because the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be medium; and it is not necessary to put the needles too far from the flesh and the skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture; and then cut the ends of the needles, so that they do not prick the patient when he sleeps, and put bandages or pieces of cloth at the ends of the needles for them to hold, and leave them until the wound is sewn together; and this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds, because there one needle suffices or II the second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the II chiez dou cuir and the II chiez dou syfac together with an awl where there is the good medium thread; and when you have pierced these points all IIII together, you will move the awl to the part where you began, in the manner on which one sews the cloths; and put a distance between each stitch the thickness of a little finger; this suture was known by men, and I sewed a wound that a man had on his belly, who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines were well II palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for XXIV hours, and the wound was closed until XV days, and I treated it, and he was healed. 
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the people had judged him to be dying, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in that place where one did not find any, nor any medicines; and I put on top of the wound cotton old II times a day, and I washed it with water and honey until he was healed.  
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle, and put it from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced the heart straight in straight, let the tip through the skin or sewn where you have put the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inside part to the outside; and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave one time the skin on one side, and take it back on the other, until the sewing is completely finished.  
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of stitching, that the Galicians say properly, is like any font, which assembles the two parts together naturally, and applies one chief dou syfac to the other chief, in such a manner: stitch an awl or chief dou mirach near, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two chiés dou syfac; then turn the awl, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part, at the two chiés dou syfac; then make it pierce both the outer and inner parts, at two other chiés dou mirach that are on the other side; and this is the most common manner of stitching. 
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galians says this word, and no one testifies it, one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each; and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corrals; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more grievous than the others of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like that of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as long as the arrow has moved it, put back the intestines and the gut; then put powder on top, encasing the flesh, and if the arrow has moved it, put ointment on top that is present, until the wound bows; and stitch the edge, and be sure of the sinus, and the mirach; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to bow, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you do not need other medicine in many situations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and put it around the angles, and under the armpits; and if it feels pain or rot in the bowels, and many times happens, so the black wine enemas you, and likewise if the rot comes up to the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, then it is easier to heal than the small.  
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called «jeun» cannot heal when it is damaged, and this is because of the planting of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.  
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as far as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned to black, then you must tie the place that is black, so that bleeding does not come from there, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligature, and put the two ends hanging from under the wound until outside to align the extraction when the worm falls, and the wound closes. 
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one may be able to restore it in some men, because I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and through this came the excretion and wind; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to treat until he was healed, and his bowels were joined. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him soldering, I feared that the patient was ill in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a manner: take strips with large ends, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the strip has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it strains its mouth upwards; and then cut the end, and this stays so that it cannot untie itself, then put another strip afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew the wound.  
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	This chief if it is inflamed in the intestine, and there comes no nuisance to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that it be well cleaned, and then tie to the head of this thread the thread of linen fine twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it in the rupture; and this manner of sewing of bowels is nothing but according to the way of hope and expectation; and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is nothing else nor health, except for subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula," and even when it is healed and re-closed.  
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth a knotted fault rough and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also feathered like the feather of an eye; and sometimes in clear bowe, and other times thick; sometimes pointed, and other times enough; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only by one of the IX causes: which is to know, by the little blood or body; or for its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, that does not let flesh be born; or there is too much bowe; or the matter is rotten, and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late healing, and inflamed by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it is necessary that I make you know the cure for fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and so forth that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar parts. 
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of bad healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you want to know it, so take a tent of iron or of copper, if the fistula is straight, so the one; and if the fistula is crooked, so the encircle with a subtle tent of lead, because the lead bends well around the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well surround it with tents, so irrigate it through one of the holes, because the moisture goes from one hole to another, and cleanses it; then the cover wisely in your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and is covered by force, and ask the patient well about the pain that he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you will truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, so cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foreign bodies and corrupted flesh that are inside; and then cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep straight place, so it is necessary that you cut as deeply as you can, then put moist tents in a medicine against ague, and put them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is at the bottom; and then put ointments healing good flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by these means, so cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, so cut it. 
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerves do not strike or principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then cure the king as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then care for things in order that it may be healthy; and if it is not healthy, and returns bent as before, know that you are not well gone to the font; uncover and seek as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healthy, it is good. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this does not occur, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot arrive there; if there is nothing else than to leave it to nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with pliers, if you extract it with an instrument suitable for this, and if there are many bones, then extract them all, do not leave even one; and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, cut both the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones. 
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something preventing rot, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will more easily separate the bones; and if it is a large bone, such as of leg or thigh, then keep only the corruption as long as the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part corrupted, and comes to the flesh of the bone; then it is necessary to be careful and cover everything until the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example from it and help in your work. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around XXX years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the materials came to the leg and became inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open; but the healers through their folly opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they drained a lot of material, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings that all oozed pus and moisture from the body; and many healers treated him for around II years, and there was no sage in the art of hands, until I was called to him, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what flowed through the openings to a great extent; and the young man's skin became red, and he had a yellowish color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I therefore held it back and dug into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the inner bone; I saw what appeared to me from the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except that which I had removed; and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and could not close it; and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and I was about to close the place; but I could not, because when I dug around an inch of the bone, and it was broken all over, then I restored it with medicines; and it became healthy and closed quickly, and did not need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For because of blood evacuation, often but he was healed entirely, and there was born in the place of the bone a hard cartilage, and was of good disposition and had no harm nor contrary at all in any way, neither to go nor to come. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, it is necessary to be treated in this manner: take a linen cloth, and bind it to the head of the bone which opens, and command someone that he stretch it upwards; and put another linen cloth thicker than the first linen, and tie it above the flesh which is below the bone, and extend the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to be, that the bone does not pierce the flesh; and put a piece of wood or a plank under the bone to move the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to be as one can see and feel the corruption, and be again another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted, and it does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all of the flesh; then put tinder underneath, and then bring the fire from one side to the other, the corruption, and let the fire be long along the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and bring the bone or where it contains from the other part; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to do but to cut; and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or in the finger of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nonetheless, you must inquire about this corrosion, how it opens for you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not make you go against it; and know that the instruments and threads for cutting these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and their thinness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to equip each kind of work with its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; so consider the instrument that you need according to what it befits. 
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder can be injured either from within or from without; and when you have treated the corruption with medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes by this from death, or from the malice, which is greater, of the failure of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as though it were burned by fire, and then after the blackness, follows the corruption of limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; therefore hasten to cover it, and if it is from the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar ones, if the corruption is at the head of the thigh, then cover it, and do not give it any space to come until the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, cut at the joint so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no other treatment except for the amount of its virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes in the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, cut the entire foot; and if it rises up the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to leave the patient to death; and the manner of cutting or cauterizing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister on the lower ligament, and others ministers the other ligament up, and you sever the flesh which is between the two ligaments at a spatule wide, so that the bone is uncovered; then cut or cauterize, and put on each side the drape of linen, so that the cautery does not touch the healthy part, and comes to the patient another lesion and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place immediately, or put some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the limb wounded with a suitable bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and that corrosion first came in his heel, until it encompassed the whole foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cover his foot, and was healed; and long afterward the corrosion returned in his hand, and he came to me, and I put on him things that are effective after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion; and he told me to cut off his hand, and I refused, because I had hope of treating the matter; and also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired altogether, and returned to his land, and hurried to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have recounted this story only for this reason, so that one might do otherwise if they need it. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then it bursts and drains, and the pus leaves its bed, as if it were vessels; and the skin which is above is as subtle as fine linen cloth, and does not go until to the bone or to the nerve, and such sickness is called “sain” and is not called “fistula”; but if it is so long that it comes until the bone, then it is called “fistula”; and the skin so is that you cut that skin all around, and even when it is subtle as fine linen cloth, and does not heal because of its corruption. 
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have faith that the skin is hardening, and the corruption is not in its full form, and the skin is thick with flesh, so treat it with a clyster like this: look if the breast is large, and the bow which is in it is of foul odor, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take ash, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put them to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey; and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and clysterize the breast, and restrain the opening; and let the medicine remain inside for II hours, then remove it by pressing; do this many times, until the breast is cleansed, and the odor is removed; and sometimes clysterize with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and clysterize, until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot endure either the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey or have a little pounded litharge; or you clysterize with honey and sweetened wine, that the honey may have the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the flesh airy; and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well cleansed, then clysterize with what causes flesh to grow in it, and that is that you take diaphanous plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you clysterize with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties or treated of the ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the clyster cannot enter, then enlarge it with an iron a little, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil oil, until it is enlarged; and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave only that place where the clyster can enter, and if the opening which emits odor is above, then apply the cup or lower the level where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is in place, one does not let anything impede its healing; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you want, arrange it in such a way that the bow goes to the lowest point where it is, for when the bow is in place, one does not let anything impede its healing and if you cannot cover the breast below as you want, arrange it in such a way: that the bow goes gently downwards, and do not leave anything of the bow; and take medicines consolidating to put on the sore, and stay on the linen cloth that covers the whole sore; then cut as much force into the opening of the breast as possible, larger than before; then apply ointment softly on the other cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the sore of the breast to align the bow, and do not remove the large cloth outwards except after many days once; and the one who is on the opening of the breast, often removed to remove the bow, and knows what flows from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible; and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see the nature that jumps on the sore of the breast, then know that the breasts are already healing, and approaching health; and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast lies bowed indigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches. 
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose flesh heals slowly in their wounds, and some who heal quickly; and if a wound from the chest is bad after many days, know that the breast does not close well; and if the breast is slow to close and is enlarged, then apply drying medicines, moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diaphinit ointment, because there is much vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine. Take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the residue of old wine equal in substance; then confit it and use it; and the same thing made better honeyed, when diaphinit ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire; and then glue it to the breast, and put some long licorice root and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour from quince and wormwood; and use either simples or composites: grind them, and make them into powder, and put them on the honey that I said, and use it; and if the cure is lengthened, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep, and makes an impression in the bone, or in the hard limbs, or in the members; so cure the fistula, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the angle
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps in other places; and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then the abscess grows, and runs and breaks down so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and perhaps all of it; and comes the running to the bone, as long as there comes a putrid pain, and is the limb of the foot wide, and is the color pale. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cut to it. make all the superfluity that is remaining from the joint, then cauterize the wound afterward. 
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh and it begins to prick, and bleaches, then you should put the root of the nail under the nail so that it does not hurt the flesh, and push it upward, and cut this flesh subtly and lightly, and put on the remaining flesh medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything; then cure with dressings until it is healed.  
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, so cut it, and treat it well because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal; and if you see the two corrode, so cut it in I as we have said before, then cure it until it heals; and if it is broken and hit, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first; then cut the angle of the spatula sharp by cutting across above, and keep that the cut does not come to the flesh which is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, so put something on top that soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the source from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance there is some place where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or where the birth is in some of us the two. 
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any knot of the thigh does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the thigh, perhaps moves; the size of the one who is fleshy is so light, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint, so is grievous to cure; so keep you from cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In someone who is born or needs the last notch, it is necessary that you first cut the round flesh until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for this one, and then treat it until it is healed. 
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sutures that come as two together come from birth, or from the soldering of a wound, or from the burning of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut that suture, so that the parts repair according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not fuse; or you put between two pieces of thin wood, as long as the edges are soldered, as it is necessary. 
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The soldering comes to none of his two with the palm, if it copes that soldering as is fitting.
des vils	of the
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large swollen full of melancholic superfluities that come in more members of the body; and more happen in legs of those who go on foot and who work and carry, than others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it behoves you to administer to him once purging of col, and then the salve of basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is in two ways: one is to cut it, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein and treat it thoroughly.  
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The thigh is treated in this manner: first, raise the leg in very hot water, until the large vein is softened, then straighten the leg of the patient from above the hip to below the knee; then cut the vein in I place, or II place, or III place, with a wide incision; then release and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can bear; and then tie it up, and command that he rest on meats avoiding black coal; and resume the evacuation and the salving when the veins are full, and hurt the patient.  
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The elevation of the leg is done in this manner:  Lay the leg of the sick person down, if it has a lot of hair, then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and swells the veins; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and then cut the vein from the long to the top of the knee, or in the part below the ankle; then open the skin with the scalpel and scrape the vein on both sides, until it appears when you feel it; and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord; then push the leg down, as long as it is elevated from the skin, and then put it on the splint lightly, then cut in another place above three times; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the point, as you did, and put it on another splint, as you did first; then cut another piece, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the top of the foot, then pull and lift until the second piece; then extract by section, as long as it is all released, then cut; and if you cannot pull and raise it, then put a needle in the whole thick double thread, and tie it and pull it, and push it under the tendon, and turn your hand on both sides, as long as it comes out; and guard that it does not break, because if it breaks, you cannot pull nor raise it, and it causes great discomfort to the sick person; and when you have treated it all, put wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound; and care for it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to strike the vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it only strikes the vein; and it is of thick curvature, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape: 
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where no grass or tree grows, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it can appear in other places than the legs, and this happens because of rot that comes from beneath the skin, as it comes from within the body serpents and worms, embedded between skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that in the leg there comes a great inflammation, then it changes its color, and begins the vein to flow out, just like the root of a plant.  
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder bone opens, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of felt from one and a half to two inches, and tie it, and leave the felt on the leg, and every time that it has point at the end, you envelop it around the felt, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remaining part, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely out; for if you cut it, it returns into the flesh, and causes an abscess and decay there, and evil sickness; for that reason, it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the top, and nothing remains on the body; and sometimes this vein when it is treated from five palms of length, or from ten, and one day a man came to me, to whom it came out from ten palms of length, and when you cut it, it puts the bone in view, and pierce it to the bottom, so that all comes out; and be emptied the matter which is inside, and administer to the place medicines preventing decay any day, then treat it as abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein hand pains, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes much pain, and from which it jumps pains; treat therefore as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land “disease of the ox,” because it happens many times to oxen, and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the alert of limb in limb, as long as it passes through the skin where it goes, and jumps further; and is engendered by rot of some humors, like come worms and serpents and embers and roundworms of the belly; and one doubts its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times. 
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see him being cured and treated, he cannot be healed except when it comes: so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong rope very tightly, then cut above and treat the wound, and if the thread goes deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it heals; and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or chief near the eye, then restrain below him the eyebrow forming, then cut above, and treat the wound; and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of the body with medicines dissolving for the bad humors poured, and abstain from meats causing putrefaction. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything else, like live silver when it moves from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and spread to the shoulder, and then shortly after corrupted throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it was turning back around her body, as I saw it. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I have wanted many to move pain from their place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and veins discovered, and for that appeared that constrained ventositez; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.  
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to cure this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then bind above and below tightly, and then cut on top until that windiness is constrained in its place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure with those who expel windiness, such as fetid pills, and seraphin pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are some that have large points, and small, and hairy, and joined; and those that have II angles, and those that have tongues, and those where it has pieces; and the one that falls in any member falls according to II manners: or in a principal member like the brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestine, bladder, and similar members. 
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, that I will tell you after, appear to you: then it is necessary that you desist from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the syfac which is above the brain, is when it becomes scotome and sod and overturned and red in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permixtion of understanding, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps without fur from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and leaps from the wound moist white seeming to poultices, and leaps also as burned flesh; and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside.   
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the seventh when it falls or hurts, are that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and by chance the seventh moves also like the arm, and in short black blood comes, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: know therefore without doubt that death will come. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the seventh that does not have a vein is that without any foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and gasps loudly and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs; and gets great pain and great sorrow and sighing; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested flesh leaps from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and nothing of straw comes out through the intestine route, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out mixed with blood, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and auxiliary and spine of the back and groin and hips and legs, and the seeming member, are safe according to more arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for this reason that you do the same thing.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow that shot into the root of his nose: I touched it and pulled it out from the other side under the fat of the ear, and it was cured without feeling much.  
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And treat with one game an arrow that it fell in the fat of the eye below the paper below, and the arrow was replaced, and I could not reach but the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, to all the iron light without ears; the game was safe, and nothing bad happened. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I treated an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I removed the barbs, and carefully extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian became well. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And treated a dart in a man, who had it in his chest or belly, and thought he would die; and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut on the dart, and removed it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.  
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if a man has an arrow in his thigh or back, and the wound was sewn shut; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor finds annoyance in any of its natural works.  
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And there is another man who had an arrow stuck in his face and the wound was closed; and he remained thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow in the head of the king's man, which was stuck in the middle of his nose, and it was a little bit declining to the right side; and the arrow was completely covered
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow. 
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt it with a very fine needle, and did not feel anything; and he felt pricking and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for several days, and sewed up the wound directly, and kept the patient like this for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his body; and he told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed on the wound medicine sharp and corrosive for many days, until it was open, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened in place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; and it stayed well the ends for four months, and then widened so much the wound that I put my forceps in, and the mine from one side and the other, and could not draw it out; therefore I did not cease to devise and engineer instruments in every way, until I took one day the forceps well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I drew it out, and restored the wound.  
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was healed entirely. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those that I do not say, because the books cannot take in everything; but the wise masters compare on well little thing, and on those that are present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to the descent of strange things that happen in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are not in members where they are fixed except according to II manners: or by their entry place, or by another part; and the one which is said to be through the place where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and said to never happen now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, let it remain until the carpus is carried around, and the issue be cleansed; and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it remain so for some days, and move it each day; and then when it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around to all the forest fine, as long as the area around is widened, and then treat it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: do not remove it, but let it stay there until it is equal after some days, because if the arrow comes up to the syfac, it is death.  
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not come to the surface and the patient suffers no ill effects for some days, then the instrument for drawing it out. 
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply lodged and cannot be pulled out easily, then administer poultices as I have told you; then treat the area until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body and if one cannot see it, then seek for it with all diligence; and if you feel it, then treat it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot do so because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or vein, then open as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, then remove the flesh that is attached on both sides to the point that you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out; and be careful that you do not break the arrow, that you may pull it out more easily.  
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then lay it until its surroundings are softened, then treat it, because extraction is easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes you go against it, then administer what we have said of the cure in its chapter; and guard yourself from cutting into the nerve and the vein, and put any way that you can move the arrow safely, whether soon or late, whether firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow fell into him, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where one sees nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that place so that it is visible or felt obviously: cut then above, as much as the pliers can take, and then extract it; if it jumps out now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it there still, and then begin the extraction again until it is drawn out; and if the shaft of the arrow is in there, push it out with all the shaft; and if the shaft is fallen, and you see to administer a pushing, then administer the instrument that points enter into the feather of the instrument; and then push further, and if the arrow is feathered, then push the instrument to pointed entry within, so as to ease the extraction. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the wound is surrounded, then it behooves you to cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then cure the wound as it behoves. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or in the belly or at the bladder or at the ribs, and it is close, and you can cover above, if you cut; and guard yourself from cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if need be; and cure until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of an eye, and look here at the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many varieties: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like that of a bird's feather, to thrust at the tip of the arrow, as it is shaped.  
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tongs for butting and for knowing is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one heals, of which there are XVI at the head, that is to say: II battens that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the II arteries that are in the II temples appearing; and II veins that are in the II tear ducts of the II eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the neck; and the II veins that are in the throat; and the II veins that are above the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and II veins that are below the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins which one commonly heals are V in each arm: the one is cephalic and is on the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and is on the fossa, and it is the one which one heals, that opens manifestly above the pouch. 
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the sap vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and there are two in it; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of which is below the curve of the pouch of the left rib; and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called «nesse», which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.  
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bloodletting of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs, and migraines; and the quality of the bleeding, as I say to you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient’s neck with a vise, until the two veins appear behind the ears in their two dependences of the head: so aim your knife at the spot where you feel the pulse under your hip, and make an incision there; then take the lancet, and put it under the vein up to the bone, then raise your hand to the whole vein upward, and cut and sever the skin and the vein well two fingers apart, and make blood flow out as much as you see; then strain and bind, until it is cured; and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The blood of the II arteries that are in the II temples, it is good for ancient migraine, and sodden, and accustomed ophthalmia, and to the body of tears sharp to the eyes; and the qualities of the saining are like I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck, as long as the II veins appear openly; and sends the pulse below your right, and then seigne d’enche; then lift the heart above the vein on your right index, and put the lancet below, and lift the vein upward, and the cope, as you have done in the other two veins, and make a correction of blood according to your need; then untie the patient, and put your right upon the vein an hour, then put cotton; and then the ligature forms, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their cut-off and their extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The vein of the front head is as valuable as the cephalic vein for old face diseases, and for migraine, and for redness; and its quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting it, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "excavator", whose shape is here: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and support with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then tie the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed and never open it with a wide flame. 
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not proper for the flames to be too large; and to heal across, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The blood of the II veins that are in II tear ducts helps the eyes, and the ear, and the nose, and the pupil in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their blood is that the patient pulls his neck twisting from some linen, as before; then the vein, and whether the vein is through, a piece through the long of the flame a piece wide, because there is no flesh. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction of blood, as much as you need it, and then tie up cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The blood of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and for sore throat, and for ailments of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, even when it is old; and the qualities of the blood are that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose with his left hand, and takes a fine long flame, and puts it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well inward, and the person will now begin to bleed; and do not let it go too deep, and make bleed according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The blood of the II armpits helps in the treatment of many diseases, such as inflammation, epilepsy, corrosions, and herpes, and scabies. And the qualities of the blood are that the patient strains his neck under both, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the sick person, and the sick person sitting on a seat, then open the vein long and slightly, then draw the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then make another opening in the other vein, then untie the bandage, and restrain both veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, that the wound may be healed.  
de la sainie des leivres	of the vein of the leaves 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The blood of the veins of the lips above helps in collecting in the mouth, and in the corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and sores and ulcers.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are this: make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them there are small black veins: cut therefore both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest of each part, and also make the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.  
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the vein under the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bloodletting of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and for the diseases of the eye, and for the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the bloodletting are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he raises the tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein:  bleed then one and the other, and do not go too deep, because below are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins for bloodletting which are commonly used are bled in two ways: either they are pricked with a completely thin flame or with a subtle olive like sharp curettes, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and thickness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very well-known, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are raised plains of thick blood visible, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtly pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where it has subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed skillfully, and that he stay away from the artery which is below. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the earth, and running of blood comes, then it is necessary to cauterize it, as I have said; and it must not be pricking the flame, but cutting like a knife.  
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you restrain it, and change another; or you wish any vein of it, or you cleanse in its place the vein from the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cut to the flame heals, as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the place of the vein, then thus you must draw out the arm so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then sign the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame anvil; and guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery: shun it therefore.  
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up as the urine of a child, and the vein is red and subtle, know that it is blood from an artery: hasten then, and place your hand lengthwise above it, then remove your hand if the vein is stained; which happens many times; if you tie up his arm, and leave it so, and do not move it the patient; and be without fear, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the limb is not stiff and it pains him, and the medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and stiffen the limb.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a rind of pistachio, and make it split open, and take one of the halves and tie it well up to the other day; if it does not remain unstained, then cure it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood; and the stanching is not harmful in many dispositions for the small place of the wound, and the strength of the binding of the arm.  
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the arm in the middle is so helpful that it treats blood from above the head, and from below the body, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and it befits the doctor to place himself toward the nerve which is below, and if it is not too far apart, he finds the nerve, and he inflates it and the saints should be grazed, and by chance may not heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people because of its subtlety, then you must feel it with the instrument needle; and push the nerve to your power. 
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the two nerves, then make a cut along it.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the head so helps that it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and it is good to bleed them at the olive branch or the myrtle branch, for it is the safest of all veins because it has neither tendon nor nerve nor artery.  
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the easiest place, and do not worry if it fails the first time, and one begins again; and by chance, it swells the limbs in some men, even if it fails the first time, but it does not matter. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is administered only to preserve health and to avoid diseases to come; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one should bleed at the beginning of Lent, during summer and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting which is administered to the illnesses has no determined hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and in all times; and it does not become to bloodlet children until XIV years, nor women carrying fruit from the first month until the seventh. 
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not let them bleed those who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some want to bleed, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous impurities harmful to the principal members; nor let any one bleed who is too full of meat, nor who is drunk, as long as he is so, nor those who are hydrophics; and it is worse to bleed after colic passion, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, of watching and fasting, and all that which consumes the strength, or by thing of the arm or of the body; then purify the humors, if they are thick, by meat and drinks and medicines, if you have the power; then go into a bath, if nothing forbids it, to purify the blood, and bleed from the vein of the wrist, as we have said; and guard yourself on that day from labor, and pain, and lust, and similar things; and be lying and joyful, and let the one who bleeds be higher than him who bleeds, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature above the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the blood; and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the bleeding point of a little old oil, then place the tip of your left hand over that vein below the wound an inch or where you want to bleed, so that the vein does not move and be cut by the iron. 
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that go as if cords to the groin, and some are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if one opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, therefore it behooves that the veiners be warned about these things. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, it begins again a little below where it was previously, as long as the lesion is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is afraid, let him leave it for one or two days, and do not bandage his arm: perhaps there will come boils; nor enter into a bath, then resume bleeding if he wishes; and if the wound is small, or the vein is subtle, and you doubt that it isn't as much blood as you see, pierce in that same wound directly to the entire flame; and work a point gently, so that the limb be swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place inflamed, do not begin the vein again, and put on a little bit of oil, for it thickens the body of blood and is mixed in this place with the oil; and so administer the oil in each vein that you drain the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing applies to triacle and butter of eggs, when it is put on the place; so subtly the pain and it separates when it is too large. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, even when it is only drained once or the opening of the vein is small, hasten and place on top a sponge moistened in water and a little warm, and restrain for an hour; and you must do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greening, it will not harm him; and if you see it, put on top nothing of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamine, monuments, or similar.  
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times abscesses and appearance appear at the shrine of the basilica: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore shun that you put on anything of those we have said, for by chance it may be without the artery; but make one plaster dry to harden the place, then heal with another cure, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it ooze until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is stout and strong, and has need of bloodletting, to make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little and often, and he should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is more useful than bleeding through long or wide. 
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if it is warm, treat them with blood III times or IV. And if it is of cold complexion, before bleeding, soften bread in quince syrup, or in honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a well-smelling syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it pricks at the vein, after the issue of much blood, then it is necessary that he moisten broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of fainting, for the evacuation of the vein. 
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed from another place, they must bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body which has already been weakened and causes fever; so it is necessary to milk a large quantity, and widen the wound as much as it falls into a poultice; then that you reward all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his arm when he is healthy, that death may not come in place of the poultice, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; and it does not behoove you when you see to untie his arm, and let blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon it; nor if it is curved, that he extend his arm as far as possible, for that would be bad; but leave it so long as it heals a second time; or that you point at the tip of the flame, until the blood which is frozen to the vein of the wound has issued forth, and put upon I place of the poultice in a pointed form, and press lightly. 
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a need to draw blood the second time, let it be drained in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein to draw blood from the arm is located in the place of the vein at the head for that reason she is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of the vein is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red; then it should be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then it should be cut through the width, neither wide nor long; and the opening should be wide, and the incision made close to the joint of the hand, and if he cannot pull out anything, put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood in the water until you have enough; and if it is in summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it in more in winter than in summer; and the vein of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no artery or nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The blood of the salve of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein swells, if one can see it; and if the vein is crooked, and if you cut it all through, it does not harm anything; and do not let it go too deep, because the nerves are under all the skin, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot exit. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then place oil and wool on top of the vein to soothe it, and do this for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The vein of the left hand is as good for the disease of mice, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The blood of the sophene is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as diseases of the legs, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and old leg pains, and similar illnesses. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of his healing are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it becomes numb, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins; heal therefore where more wide vein, or at the ankle, which is worth. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you drain it above the foot, guard yourself from the nerves that are below, and drain it transversely as well when cutting; and let the flame be annealed.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot insert it, put the foot back in water, and allow the vein to drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the first time it fails, begin again from above a little higher, because the place is salty. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of fire, and its puncture is worth to the pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of its vein is that the patient enters into a bath, and he pulls up above the ankle IV fingers twisting, because otherwise it doesn't open the vein; and if it opens, you cleanse the vein in all the ways that you can, and traversing; and it is better that you cut it, because the skin is dry, and it is very well recovered by the hands of man. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it [the dislocation], search any vein of the one who opens or back of the foot, and towards the small thigh, and guard the nerves; and make so much correction of blood as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put cotton on top and bind it; she is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	of the suction cups  
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Sucking blisters are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and suction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is felt to be harmful is according to II manners: either it is all fire or without fire; and cupping that is done by hitting and by the extraction of blood is done in XIV places of the body, of which one is entirely on the head; and the other is in the neck; and II others in II ribs of the neck; and the cup under the chin; and the cup on the II shoulders; and the cup above the hips; and the cups between the II arms; and the cups on the II legs; and the cups on the II ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, except for the small veins that are spread throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken as one does from bloodletting of a vein; and it should not be administered, neither all fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.  
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of maladies it is necessary to bleed, or for customs, then we must bring them each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time; for there are such that, when they have need to bleed, they have a heavy head; and there are those who have swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have inflamed the tongue, and cough up blood; and there are such who dream, and see through blood and corpses and deaths and similar things.  
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is emitted from the month, we command to ventilate after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bloodletting of the vein helps with the great pain of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventosation is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic, and it is not fitting for those who are of cold complexion to use it, or who have phlegm, because this does great discomfort to them; and therefore it is not fitting for the elderly to use it, nor those who have or chief colds maladies.  
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal with this, often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the neck is in place of the vein of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is good for the treatment of the foot, and for opening the channel of the groin, and to all, and to repletion; and it is necessary to put a little, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause blockage in the stomach or heart. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations at the II ribs of the neck are good for pains in the head, and headache, and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the patient to spread his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not have a hemorrhage. 
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The venting under the chin is good for mouth ailments, and gum rot, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The incisions of the veins are worth as much as three veins in the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to feel them too deeply, because their skin is bare and lies near nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup which is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the base, and for diseases of below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be of iron, that she has need to well suck; and perhaps, if she were thin, she would break; and in this I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups of the legs are helpful, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the knees, and of the bladder, and relax the flowers; and are in their place at the .ij. shins, and the .ij. ankles, and all the same they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in more dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and suck temperately, and put it steadily, and move equally, and do not cease doing this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then finish, and put back the suction cups, and take ward in the disposition of the body, because there are such who have tanned flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, then it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to gently open the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, then it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, let us often return; and if the veins are thick, let them be made thinner by fire, and the ends so that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard, and who have bad pores, that you grease their places with cupping glasses of oil appetizer and dissolving: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or almond oil, or oil of squash seed; and if it is in winter, of cresson oil, or lilies, or chamomile, or something similar. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is being treated has taut skin and large pores, one must not put any oil on it, but one must wash it after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or something similar. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, rises from ease with myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have gross superfluities let themselves rise from old wine, or from their own water, or from a decoction of anise or chamomile, or others like; and it is not fitting to suck before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or II; and do not sleep after the suction, and it is necessary that he be warmed, when it is due to be suctioned and when it is suctioned. 
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard him who is well-tempered with jaundice, and if his blood is too thick and inflamed; then he should eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the meal, and similar things; and quince seeds, and roasted meat, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, let him take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and menjuce poc, and menjuce pucins and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he will be vented, he must drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men triacle or musk before or after the venting, to comfort the principal members; and be subtle the sans, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied without harming are those that are placed on the liver and the spleen and gout and on the belly and the flank and the hips and the groin because these members do not suffer from being hurt on their own, and it is done only to draw blood from member to member as when we put them on the breasts when the milk comes in; to remove the viscosity that is in the member as when we put suction cups on the belly and the flank to reduce the limb; and to remove pain when there is an obstruction or stone, since by its attractive virtue it may perchance remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place; and so it does when one puts it on the liver and the spleen when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and some times filled with warm water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for it have been boiled. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should have two arms of a width and half palm in length, and have on the side around the middle a small hole, as if to put a needle, and be of iron, soft before so that it does not prick the patient when putting it on the limb; and have in the middle a bar of iron or steel, to put a burning candle, and let them be large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them; because the suction cups of children are other than those of old people, and of the thin ones compared to the fat. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus put this suction cup onto the limb: take the candle of wax or linen, and place it inside the suction cup along with the shaft that is within the suction cup, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and the ends must be on the openings that we have said, so that when one wants to, vapor goes in, and one removes the suction cup; and take the linen as before, and repeat often, if you have need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup which is administered in the illness of pleurisy, in all acute cases, it has no handle or opening, and it is not administered unless it is full of water, and it is placed on the limb only so much; and this is the form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leech are brought into use only in members where one cannot apply leeches because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar; and in the fleshless places of them, such as two or three, and other similar; and the quality of using it is that when you find leeches that are in clean sweet water without being purged, take them; and put them in a nut in fresh water until they become plump, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let the member be bled and have a cupping glass applied, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put the leeches on top; and when they are full and fall off, if there is a place where you can apply a cupping glass, apply one, because this is of great benefit. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If it is not so, if you raise the place of ash, and then of water, very well, and then the sprint; and if the part heals too after the body of the wounds, if you wet a cloth of linen in cold water, and put above, as long as the wound is stretched; and if the wounds are multiplied, if you put above vitriol ground, or gale, and similar things, as long as it is stretched; or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them until they are dried on the place, now it will stop; and if you need more of it, if you take other wounds.  
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the sutures will not be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until the suture comes out, and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden; and when you see that they are coming out, powder them with a bit of aloes and silk ground, or ash, they will now hold. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoring of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear friend, that the foolish mire themselves in this chapter so they never see any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them; and for this cause is the science restrained in our land, because I never found any good one; and I know nothing, except by the science of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have shown you here in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these II chapters before. 
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It behooves us therefore to say or prologue of this book the sum of the word and chapters where the sages put his understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if his temperature is not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say, cold meats, and meat of deer and lamb, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb; then return the patient to his former rule that he has used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and belly of beef, and eels, and fresh fish, and red wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment they regain strength and the fracture heals faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones broken in the old and the decrepit do not well take back nor solder according to their nature for the dryness of the members, nor those also who are too tender, like the bones of little children; but no care, reset on the broken bone I great tendons which hold together and join the limb together, as long as it forces so as it was before; and not at all point of its work, and for this you must nourish them with big meats, as we have said. 
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the side and another that goes to a point, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if with fracture, and fracture to a small crack entirely.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each manner has its instrument, and its own tool in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place; and is known the fracture of the bone by those that the leg is twisted, and opens well by exterior, and hurts at the pressure of the hand; and when there is no torsion nor hurt at touching, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no fracture; but it may well have torsion, or fissure, or small fracture. 
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you should not move it by hand, but put on the remedies that come after here, and then restrain it carefully.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes in arc, and are the II parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them equally well, so that abscesses do not come; and if abscesses come, let him leave for no day, until the abscesses be appeased; then he puts it equal to the flesh that you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of this one where there are pieces; then restrain, as it is convenient after. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone is broken in pieces, if it's of two parts, if it's hands or feet, or to your hand if it's a small limb, or if it's two cords, or if it's one cord and to your hand; and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work does not come to the patient lesion nor pain; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms. 
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if it is arranged nicely, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscess hot and contraction to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, carefully instruct the patient not to move it, neither when awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the limb be so secure that it feels no pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, except at a point, and it is necessary to put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and keep him straight so that no tortuosity comes when he is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs, and similar: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and thin linen cloths; and those which are large, such as hips and legs: it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole great limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no tear; then bind around light splints, III tours or IIII according to the limb, and strain one hand a little at all the bandage, then go above the fracture and strain less, than the fracture then moves away a little from the fracture; and soften the bandage little by little, until you reach a great part of the healthy place, then take the other bandage, and turn around again straight above the fractured place; then return to the lower part of the fracture, and strain moderately, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first place above; then put between the bandages splints of linen or cloths, so that it be all equal, then tie everything on top with a bandage, and then put your well-made pads on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an inflammation or abscess, put a soothing poultice upon it, which takes away the inflammation, and leave it so for some days; then strain the edges of the wound together, and let them be of half a palm's breadth well-set, or of staff from which one makes staves, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts upon the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others; and also as long as it is convenient to the limb of smallness or greatness; then bind upon the splints just as you have done at the first layer, then tie above with a thread evenly, just as in the first layer upon the fracture; more strict is above, less below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen; for if the thread are thick, as I want works of the fools who make their bandages with cords of twisted linen, and this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not behoove that there be between each splint less than two fingers' width of space. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is irritated by the edges of the stars after the tightening in their healthy places, then put under them pads of linen or wool felt so that it does not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a break and the tendons are broken, I will say about its cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put splints, because after V days or VII, or more according to your certainty of abscess, it heals; and see here the manner of the ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour that holds on the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, not too light nor too thick, and use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in more dispositions, and also to women and to small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.  
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three pieces of ginger, laudanum, nutmeg, asafoetida, and Arabic gum and myrrh and aloes, each  five; alechil eight, and make it into powder, and mix it with a good amount of egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to more men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of plaster that is good for torsion: take mugwort and marshmallow, ana X З.; myrrh and aloes, ana VIIII З.; acacia VI З.; Armenian bole X З., and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of plaistering joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothing the pain that comes, and the use of the bone, and the fracture: take new linen, and moisten it in wine and oil cooked, and put it on the place.  
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore [anything], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removes properly the pains. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of ointment which restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earth laurel leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of splinting for the restoration of a broken bone and to lessen the remainder of the abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marshmallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of chickpeas, one part each; and grind, and boil with wine, and if the limb is chilled, boil it with moist coriander water, or water, and use. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another manner of setting a bone more forceful than the first, when an abscess comes hard to the restoration of the limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balm, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and camomile, each one part; and grind, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its repose. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Galen says in his book that one should put on the broken limb for restoration only a certain thing made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and that it should be between two soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that one must put upon the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of making an ointment that is good for the injury and pain: take mugwort and chicory of men chopped, or feathers of bird, and wormwood, and equal parts, and grind them, and make it into an ointment and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then you unbind it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor have the bones moved from their place; if he does not unbind for many days And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or inflammation, then hasten, and unbind it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and sponge of sea moist, and dip in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, half in water or in rose oil, and tie above a nut, as long as you are sure of a hot abscess; and rest the inflammation of the member, and be removed the pain, then begin again the subtle ligature, and a little of plaster, and do not bind it so tightly as before; and subtilize until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and pain and swelling are entirely gone, and you have need of plaster and linen, then begin again as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb any of what we have said, then do not unbind it before III days or IIII or V or VII; and at no time leave it XX days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and approaches the adjustment of the bone on top; therefore restrain it more than first, and it makes its flesh grow, as I said before; and if you see it drying more than is necessary, know that there cannot come nourishment; arose then the hot water from bath, all times that you unbind it, and this be each third day, and slacken a little the ligature; by this work therefore shortens the nourishment to the limb, and amends hastily those who do foolishly, who leave the limb crooked: this is evil, and so is the work dangerous, and I see no other thing than to let it dry and to operate it straight. 
des diverses manieres de brisure	of diverse ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of fractures, and various figures, and the causes are determined; for there are fractures that are made by the thrust of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the shaft which is below the bone, such as it is made high or fast; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure". 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and is the wound of these two fractures large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or splitting or of the collarbone of stone, or of the cheek on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture penetrating, which approaches to the skin that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound which is put back in the bone as subtly as a horsehair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound which is made either by striking of stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and makes the piece of bone go inside, and its legs are like how the blacksmiths do when they strike on the cauldrons; so it goes between the pieces. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or chiefs moist bones, such as children's heads; and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are broken off from them such as stars; and I will speak of it in its place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by the retraction on them, and the examination of tendons, and by the corrupted cartilage that is on top.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of capillary blood is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs on it, the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the fracture, take heed of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and eyes staring and reddening, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an escapable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the broken bone first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it behooves you to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, as much as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone may not rot and bring about the accident that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the broken part as follows: and it is that you prick the head of the patient deeply, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more carefully than you can, and if bleeding comes out when uncovering the bone, or abscess apply, then help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with dressings soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess has calmed down, and be assured of the bleeding; then begin to remove the bone, and this is done in two ways of work: one way is that you cut at a narrow width in front, and this is the form:  
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make one other incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron, and in working lightly, so that you do not cut the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and out, then it behooves you to pierce it through, so that you administer splints with drill bits, not more than that lest they pierce beyond the bone of the test, and must have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point beyond the bone; and you should have several more, so that each comes in its place to the width of the bone, so that you have drill bits for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of splints:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing through the broken bone are that you put one drill bit on the bone and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill bit elsewhere a little after, and so do all around, then cut with the cutting instruments the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like tweezers, pliers; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the dura mater.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you will have pierced the bone, and treated it, it is necessary that you remove the appendage which is stayed from the bone to all other instruments similar to a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more firm and more subtle than the other scalpel; and if there remains anything of the small bones, or no scales, then the oste lightly to the instruments; then cure the wound of tents and ointment as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and he praises it much, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered that part, then you place beneath the head of this lens-shaped incision tool, for this is its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut in one direction, and is the part sharp in two sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is below; if it adheres to the bone, then gently lift it off, because one should lift it without discomfort, and without fear. 
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that asperity and remove the scales with a fine razor, of which you must have various quantities, in order to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you begin with large razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer the cause according to its placement; and this thing is not returned to him who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is uncovered, it behooves you to take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, that you do not burden the wound, then administer from above another linen bandage, and do not tighten it more than necessary to keep the wound alone; and let it remain like this for a day or two, until the abscess has subsided, then untie it, and administer medicines such as the roots of lilies, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and arnica, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer further medications unmixed with mordants; and keep that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment there, nor allow any scab to gather, because when a scab gathers on the brain cloth, it will corrupt and rot, and bring great evil to the patient; because when one puts mordant things on the wound, they will fester from above.  
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take ward then, if any bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blackening does not come from outside except for the medicine that has been put on it, that it may have virtue, then you must take a part of honey and III parts of rose oil and glue I drapel and put it on the scab; then cure in ways of cures as it is necessary, until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no times are broken the two parts of the two above, or one by the alone, because they are two bones; and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break at all, if not forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or a hole in them, and place each fracture inside your index finger, and to the palm outwards, until the bones return according to their natural shape; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and it cannot come to its place, then you must put it even at the head of a stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is of II parts, make another one, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has calmed down, then bind it with two tents of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.  
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the thicknesses be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And certain restorers say one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the making of auburn from an egg, and ground flour; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.  
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one puts in their place goose feathers instead of tents, and so with i.e. one sheet of cloth wrapped around it, and holds the bandage, and breathes the patient amongst; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes to the new ones while you are working on it, if you put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in one poke of diachylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come not, put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, conﬁted with egg white, then put light dressings on top, and do not bind them in any way; and if the fracture of the bones is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this, then sew the fissure, and cure it with things like bandages and ointments that are suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside the bone, then cure it with tents, and put splints on them, until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is outside only so much, and is not broken in two, except that it buckles inward, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the sick person; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of the right hand, and push the fracture inward lightly, and fix it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is separated in two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a rupture, so restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone cerote, and put on i drapel double; and put on the drapel a great estele well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it up as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, so untie it on the third day, and then reset what is changed; and put a plaster on top, of powdered mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after which you have removed the cerote; and put on top of the plaster light linen, and if the plasters dry up, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in 3 weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, so administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of bone has been removed; so subtly of the bone with instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, so enlarge it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, so close the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable for this, to hinder flesh, until it be healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The fracture breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the broken bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each of the fractures to your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be neither appearance nor blemish.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your need; and gently lift the bone, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you put each of the fractures as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder back with force because it comes in front, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his side, and put under the shoulder one hour glass, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture to your two sides, and if you find it fractured, then it is necessary that you split above; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any mounting, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to guard against displacement:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and seems like a spoon, and is not too deep, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one broad, and the other narrow, as is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, so close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, so cover the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one cloth in rose oil and honey and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of white of egg, and put light pads on top, and put a spear under the armpit, if you have need; then take a very large bandage of one palm wide, then put the double drape above the pads and the plaster; then take a strip subtle of III two wide and long, and wrap it around that bandaged, so that the head of the bandage be hanging down; and put the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the good armpit, and under the bad armpit; and tighten each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, so reward it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps the small pillow under the armpit, to raise the shoulder up; so alleviate the fracture of the shoulder by relieving the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until XX days; then renew the plaster, if you see that it needs it, and restrain and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored at most in XXVIII days, and less in some men. 
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated in the middle, and it should only be moved with touch; then arrange according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then place on the wound powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on top a double cloth. Then place on top a wide and thin splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is hitting in any part of the shoulder, so use linen bandages to cover it, so that the splint lies evenly; and then tighten it with a very firm bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the wound every day; and whenever it softens, tighten it, and place the splint straight if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty days or twenty-five, And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that easily comes loose.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone has gone forward and is not below the heart, then do as follows, and apply the bone, and do what we have said in the break of the collarbone to soothe an abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end.  
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, it sinks down to the back, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and all things, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the seams in the broken bone, and he feels them well. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the sides of the two bones with your hands, and skillfully brings them together in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put plaster and bandages above the fine layer of salt, or some other light paste, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the band around the back, and restrain it firmly, and reward every hour the bandage, and if it loosens, tighten it; and if it needs to be untied, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hasten then, and untie it, and remove what has come from the bandages, and address those things in ways of healing; then reapply the bandage, and restrain it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the head within, and they bend only for that reason because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry on the two sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoring is that you put equal the fracture, as it convenes.  
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the splint on it, and restrain it with a band, if you need it. 
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning inward, the patient feels very great pain and pricking, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also pains, and coughs and vomits great plants of blood, and this is of grave health, and the ancients have placed great engines upon it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to bring the rupture to the outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, except for hot abscesses if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, then treat it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that some put suction cups on the spot to suck out  fluids, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup pulls out superfluities to the spot for the arrangement of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say of you it must cover the place with wool dipped in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the flesh equal, then be cured from the cure of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot suffer because of the bone that pricks the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to split on the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under a tool to ward the face; and afterwards one must cut the bone, and drain gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put on it moist cloths in rose oil, and put on top of that; and cure while the place where it is appropriate for the abscess, and lying still on its side or where it should be, until it is healed.  
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you take notice if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many cases, and if they move and feel well when pulled and held still, know that the bone's articulation is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care into it.  
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is sound or not, then take ward if the limbs are softened, and if the accidents are who are in hands, and on the back there is buoyancy and ejection without volition; and when one has supported it on its belly, then there is ejection without volition. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is set on its back and it wants to sit down, it cannot. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in its cure. 
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward it if there is an abscess hot, so put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a band, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then cure it with ointment inhibiting flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," then put your fist from your left hand into it, and set it equal to the other hand in your power, then put on the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones dislocated, do this, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes it happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, it has not happened from a little weakening at the top; and making long, and declining to the side, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and tingling, and swells what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as much as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the figure of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, put equal to this fracture, as long as it is in a natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, put the patient on his belly, as long as the restoration of this fracture becomes apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you would have it even, put it upon the splint, then put upon a strip of wood or of bark, and restrain the splint so that it does not move; and apply the place under the ribs, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep upon his healthy side or upon his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes to it, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and put upon it what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as it is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the elbow and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads of two ropes together, and lift them up, and place the patient on one seat; then place his broken arm on top of the stick, as far as it comes to the armpit, and make a curvature in the stick, then put on any heavy thing or minister's extend it down; then put the patient's fracture equal to his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his stretcher and ties his hand to his neck, then instructs two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other holds below by about a foot, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, hold the linen beneath and above the fracture, and extend each minister to its side.  
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the shoulder, it is necessary to put one linen below the armpit and the other towards the side, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the side, then it is necessary to put the linen gently, without labor, until the fracture is equal on top and on the side; then set the fracture as it should, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess does come there, do not restrain it until .vij. days, and put on linen half in oil and rose oil, until the abscess has calmed; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you place the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place of stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. two of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture .iij. two on each side; then restrain on the splints, in the same way as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess hot, so leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the binding, that itching or inflammation does not come to the place, or the suppurations cannot come to the limb for because it is too far. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come to pass, then he should not untie it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion full of wool evenly, and look every hour of the day or from the nut, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the ligaments are softened; if it advances by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have put forward, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken back in forty days from the whole; and therefore one must loosen and administer bath and medicines of emollient for the place to be bettered. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and crowded, it stays untied for days or months.  
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two "fossil," because one is small, and that follows the socket; and the other is large, and that is below, towards the little toe; by chance breaks the large fossil alone, or the small, and by chance and both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.  
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then it is necessary to gently extend it and make it equal. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great fossa, then it must be pulled more strongly; and extend above the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the ministers' arms to the part below his hand, or at the limb, and one other minister on the other above. 
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirrors equal, according to its best form. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any dislocated that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it as above with the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of restoring abscesses arise, then glue a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft; and lay the plaster above subtly, until the abscess is calmed. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then the osteopath removes the cerote, and he puts in the emplastrum of powder from the mill with abundance of egg, then he puts the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be close more outwards, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in more dispositions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or two; and restrain more over the fracture than elsewhere, and all days less distancing, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths which are over the splint be soft and moist, and be not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is restrained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.  
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the limb after several days.  
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until the itching be appeased; and let the limb not rest at all. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the tightening, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, so the address. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the nourishment returns, and then restrain it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not unbind him until twenty days. 
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or when he is turned around, then let him put his hands on his neck, and be his neck equal, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and among us there are few fractures, and it comes but rarely many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behooves the patient to sit crossed and straight before him equally; then put his hand on the board stretched out, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and place them equal in size, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the base toward the belly of the palm, make a ball of cloth and command the patient to tighten it on his broken palm; then strain it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as hard as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it behoves.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the outside, it behooves you to put a splint above and another below in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand and close the connection between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the two bones, if it is a pouch, put it equal, as it behooves; and restrain it with the plant, and if you see fit to put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and not move; and if the fracture is in the other bones, such as in the index or one of the others, put it equal, and tie it with the healthy bone which is after; or you tie them all in one holding, that it moves well, or you put a splint on top, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of an abscess, hot, and dry what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is so-and-so, that is, one above the fracture, and one below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his limb to his equal part; and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one ligament should be pulled towards the groin, and the other ligaments below the fracture. 
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is near the knee, and then the ligaments are around the knee, and the extension below; then put the hands to the bone equal with their two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the bandage, if there comes an abscess. 
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess hot, let it be soothed then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the broken leg with a hard bandage doubled in II or III, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heels reach to the root of the thigh, and put long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread go up; then turn back on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put above the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal the tightening, then begin to tie firmly III turns or IIII on the fracture; and as much as you go up on the fracture, and less the constraint; then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the hip and the leg, and tie III splints that are above, then return down to the end of the thread, until you reach near the foot; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it so, then lest there comes a suppuration or swelling or any other semblance. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, let him untie it, and address those that come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, it is fitting to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is fitting to split the place, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it be healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the hip is broken in this way, as with the shoulder and arm; however, in this restoration, the patient does not ring any bells.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee's vein
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee joint there are few fractures, but it bends many times.  
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, then it is no longer just a crack, or a puncture, and it becomes like every wound, and without wound, and this everyone knows well. 
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts equal those who are rounded to their places, as long as it is assembled moves as one can; then put the splint, and put on it a round piece of wood, if you need it, and restrain it as it suits, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other wounds, as hot abscesses and similar; so put to each accident what suits him, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called by right 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and they have all the same fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every way. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen well; and it turns downwards. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore administer extension, and place it even, and bind the bones evenly; but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be minor and lighter; and the splint according to your strength. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of seasoned wood that support the leg on either side, and be long from the knee down to below; then wrap them in two layers with one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this juncture, the leg cannot incline to the right or left, and thus it is good. And no one administers a single stick along the length of the leg, and if it is wood, it is placed on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done is this in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; and cure thus until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot comes often fracture and at two points, and there happen only a few in more situations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there happens fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he would like to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return into their places; then put the splint and bandages on, and put under the belly of the foot a small board to 2 finger spans wide, then restrain the foot with a bandage, then when you have wrapped the bandages and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one finger more wide, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain it well; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in .i. cloth of linen, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it stand on the top of the table before the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said to the other fractures, as we have said; and cure each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make the sitting enlarged, then incline it to the part of the back, and let it be held by behind; then fill the basin of the woman with cotton, and put in as much as the stool; then turn the woman over, and lift her back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the stool; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or around: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a sheep bladder, and tie a rope at one end, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the rope firmly, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the finger of the man or of the woman is broken, restore it like as we have said in the bone of the hip; and are not concealed these fractures near him who puts his study and his use into it, and attends my book.  
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture, it signifies more than one way to restore it: then therefore. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the member, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it in the member; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or until healed, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then retain the vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess comes to it, then let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it for three days or four, because you would bring evil accidents upon it.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then it befits that you put it lightly in its place with your hands, with small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not readily available to put it in place with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. or .viij. long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary that the maker makes .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and let it be tapered at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called “palainche,” for which the shoulder blade must be placed on top of the visible bone; and pull it at once, until it returns, and be equal to each other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is fine, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you break the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have hold. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either a knife or saw, to your power; then reinsert what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If so long as it is in its place, then soak the drapery in black wine vinegar, and properly cleanse it when it is clean; and do not put on the wound any cerote nor anything else where there is oil, that it may not bring forth rot and corruption; then administer compresses when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give heed well that the wound be not strained with the fracture; and many times have foolish people done this and brought upon the patient death or corrosion at any time; and let the strapping be softer and more supple than for other fractures.  
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it does not behoove to put on stars; but wrap around, in place of stars, hard drapes, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to swell, remove those things which you have placed on it and put healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmotion and similar. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be supported in such a manner that the bone fits together lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this day passes, and it cannot be joined but returns into place, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these loose pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter before. 
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, such as the bone of the hip or the shoulder, and other similar bones of the large limbs, if you do not treat it, because many times death comes, but leave it until it decays; perchance it will heal by itself after XX days or XXX, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils which come from the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the health of the fracture, even when it's near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot do the limbs its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take ward therefore if it comes to us: if it administers topical medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaice, and similar things, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and they confit with a stimulating wine or with yolk of egg or with honey; and put them on the knot in poultices, and hold it well, and do not untie it for days; and then untie it, and start another one, until the nodules are removed; or you strain onto a piece of plank well made; because the properties of the plank are that it removes all swelling from the limbs; and if the nodule is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so cut above it, and make the superfluity appear; or you reapply it to any razor, until it is removed, and the cure as long as it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored, and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was tied too tightly and not tied as it should; or because there were too many bandages and the member could not come back to its proper function; or because of excessive swelling; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make his body soft, as long as the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and pleasure; then put poultices on the limb so that the poultice attracts great movement, and the swelling often of water comes down, until the movement returns to the limb; and it returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The member twisted after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and brings great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the knots and the torture are fresh, then it behooves them to be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of wormwood, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the one i. make a softening plaster, such as diacoylon well made, and you take the poultice of wormwood, and confit it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs grease, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that lessen swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes is dislocation removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with moist hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And bring movement to the limb every hour. 
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is ingrained and hardened, like stone, and need be to remove it with iron, then it behoves to cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put care and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation is from any joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is poorly formed, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now necessary to bring back without bracing.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance when it is reset, there is pain; for this reason it is not good to move it while it is swollen; many times it brings forth suppuration and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave it, until the abscesses are all quieted; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the wound comes in its place. 
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens sometimes that the jaws become dislocated and the dislocations are in two ways: either they are a little bit out of their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the cheek, and close the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then it behooves you to reset it carefully, and do not hesitate; and in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and puts his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be outside, to put it straight; and command the patient to soften his mandibles, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the minister puts it equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back (re-aligned) painfully, even if it is the two jaws together, apply hot water and oil, until they are gently moved; do not hesitate to bring it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with softened cloth, so put on top of cloths moistened in a cerote made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them neither to the right nor to the left, nor does he try to eat, but takes light food, as long as the pains are gone, and the jaws are healed; and then chew what he wants lightly, and do not work at all to open the mouth for eating and drinking, as long as the jaw is well healed and sound. 
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be set in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then come fevers and accustomed swellings, and perhaps a belly ache, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a dangerous thing; and many times die those who have it, within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The harness cannot dislocate from within the side of the ribs and the hip, and it is dislocated no times outside, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies sound on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it; and the shoulder which is towards the outside cannot dislocate; if perhaps it does, and if it dislocates any time, restore it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus same is brought back the shoulder joint, when it is out of place. 
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it is dislocated to the part of the seat downward; and the second is to the part of the breast; and by chance it is dislocated to the upper part, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated down towards the seat, especially in those who have little flesh, because in these it is easily thrown; in those who have enough flesh, it is thrown with difficulty, and returns with difficulty. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary that you feel it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the cure.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And is known the dislocations when it is pulled down towards the hip, and puts difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their variety manifest; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip to touch the top of the shoulder, as if it were one piece; and the patient cannot bring back his hand to his side, nor move from any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly at the touch; and this manner of dislocation is not only to be brought back, when it is new, or if the child is sick.  
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers raise the hand of the sick person upwards, then put their fingers below the armpit, and raise the joint with force upward to its place; and the minister raises the hand, and extends it upwards, then puts it below; so it will come back gently.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days after, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and administer ointment softening and soothing, such as decoction of aloe and fenugreek and melilot in water, and be administered; then be supported the patient on his back, and put under the buttocks a sto of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the sto, and lift the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pull the hand of the sick man; and another minister holds the head of the sick man, so that he does not move down; this shoulder returns all now, and if you see it re-insert according to this manner: and it is that you make a present of the man who is bigger than the patient; and be straight towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the buttocks of the patient, and lift the buttocks up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the sick man down towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can put with him any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now. 
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And reset it also in another manner: and is a long stick put in the earth, whose head be as much as the pillow, and not too big nor too thin; then be put under the sick person, but that he have coverings above, and the sick person be standing by the long of the shaft; then be stretched his hand down on the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take a stick of II arms long and IIII fingers wide, which has the head rounded to enter easily under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie above the head of the staff cloths so that the staff does not hurt the patient, then put it below the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm up on the staff's long side, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one step of a ladder wide, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever manner that it is, it behooves you to put under the strap a ball of wool even, then place the plaster of powdered mill, with incense and yolk saffron, on the whole shoulder and around, then strain it under the strap gently, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand at its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it behooves him to move little, as long as the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then move more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then you must administer cautery to it in three punctures, as it is laid out in the chapter on cautery. 
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all these things, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is toward the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there administer another place; and care until it be healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then make the patient take many baths, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and if it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not restored, because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the knife to the patient with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all. 
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus as abscesses come to its aid, because if abscesses were to come to its aid, it would be grievous to bring it back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back completely at all, even when it is in the back; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is like this when it can be brought back that you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arms be spread, and the hands do move according to the knife around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and hold of the root of the palm the knife which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with their hands, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then that you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth; and when the minister joins the joint with his hand, he puts oil on one of the oils to soften the joint, then pushes the joint together until it returns; and when it is in its place, put a dry plaster over it with honey from an egg, and hold it firmly, and place the arm at the collarbone of the sick person, and leave it for several days, then untie. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, she unties the bandage and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not set well, she re-applies the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it like that for some days, until it is firmly set; then unties it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint has been reset, and it moves, bathe him and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fleece of fat sheep, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and let it enter into the bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the fleece back on, and then enter into the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until it is healed; and if you see, put on wool cloth moistened with warm butter, and strain it on; it will return to its place. 
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is easier than other joints. Nonetheless, it should be returned to its place immediately, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the place does not become inflamed or come to have a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the putting back is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he places it equal, so that he puts his palm upon the appearance of the joint, and pushes it as much as it comes back all the way, it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place; then put the sick person's back of his hand on a table at the extension and putting back. 
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and the mirror puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good. If not, then the restraint of soothing plasters upon the abscess will be applied, and let it be left so until it restarts.  
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint remains twisted; and does no harm to the patient other than as long as the hand is numb, and cannot pull anything at all: therefore know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; so there is no other means except to constrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is nothing else of value. 
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put it on the splint that we have said, then strap it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No times are dislocated the bones of the hand on each side, no times on the back of the palm or the belly; therefore are the bones and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then sustain the chief of the bone, and the pent towards the part where it is disjoined; and let him 2 days, and then puts him equal that day; and don’t tie it, as we have said, and unties it every day, and makes it move, and ties it again; and do this often, until it is straight, and all also do, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and all also do, when it is dislocated on other part. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or the neck is dislocated, or there are many dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the joints jump forth without will, and cannot be held, and many times they soften any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great words, in which there is no great profit at all; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gibbosity which comes to the breast in front, there is nothing nor cure; and also the one which comes straight into II costs, and it cannot be cured except the one properly which comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the patient should be stretched on his face in the same place, and have strain below him, so that he does not move; then put the splint at the head in the earth forming, and the other to the feet, and tie a rope below the shoulders of the patient, and the other to the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two ministers grasp the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the II splints; and be well bound, the splint as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and place it beneath the arm pit, and have the patient lie on his side, and put the head of the board under the armpit, then place the middle of the board upon the spine; and place the patient's feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it to the turner who turns by hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And that you place II splints on the head of the patient's arm of a large, and towards the feet II others, and there be between each splint, outside and inside, a palm's width of long; and have in each splint I hole, where the rope goes through, and let the splints be firmly in earth so that they do not move; and between each II splints have I turning splint, on which the ropes turn, and have in II turning splints II small splints of a palm's width, for to turn the turn; and then tie the rope which is among the shackles to the turn towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other turn, and each of the ministers turns his turn all over the rope, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, put a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the compresses, and then the splint of a tablet of III thumbs in length, that presses the place of the rib and the part of the spine from below, then tie it with a linen, as we have said, and use the patient to subtle nourishment, until he is healed; and if any thing comes at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of wood, and sometimes it appears in the back vertebra of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and this is the bone which opens, for that reason one must not have presumption; by chance would bring death. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out as dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and little dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased one cannot bend his knee; and there is the swelling which is below inflamed with a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there. 
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to fire, so is this accident contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to the front, so is that he is well his leg according to the fulfillment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it comes behind, so is that he cannot expand his knee, nor double, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the head of the hip at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The return of this kind of dislocation is that you should consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its arrangement, so there is no cure; and it does not behoove him at all that he has presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocation, so hurry that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other care.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you appear with a strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or on the loin that is tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand upwards in such a way that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then tightens with a sudden force above the hip; and another holds the head of the thigh; and extend it both up and down at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this is not so, it is necessary to take care of its appearance When the dislocation is at the shoulder, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy side, then place the linen on the root of the hip, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the thigh; then seize some other ministers his arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased hip, and stretch it outwards in a firm manner; now it will return to its place; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen cord above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two spans more than the other; then let it be hung by the head from a pole, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then command the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers standing with the sick person, who firmly embrace the hip, because the joint now returns readily.  
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is on the outside, so the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has gilbosite, and restrain the loin upon the leg sick properly, and upon the hip also; then put II tisons, I to the head and I other to the feet, then stick I tison between the hips of the patient in the form; and ait plantei of drapelz moist entor, that it does not blister the sick one, then extend each minister towards him, and the mines puts equal to his hand the dislocation. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If this is not so, put him on a table, and press him as we have said in the glossary, and lie the patient on his healthy side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the minister's pain on the sick ankle, then press with the other hand, and bring it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the hip, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down, nor raise up the land, but it should be as if the hip had been dislocated outward, as we have said about the lying of the two hips; and let it be on its face, and the band stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint at the table; and it will be good when the patient stretches his legs, and they are equal; therefore adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three days or four, then undo it, and put the splint on top; and if you see that they are equal, then strap them as before, and leave it for three days; then undo it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if he does not rest on his hip, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his flank, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and retract between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he rests his leg on his hip lightly; and put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest on the hip, and tie them together firmly for three days or four, then untie it; and do not let the patient move, as long as the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.  
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels is sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs of this are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated; the reduction of this is light, and one should extend it gently with his hands when it is only bruised. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, it behooves you to make the patient sit straight, and hold him by the ministers except by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot toward you with your right hand, and then with your left two times, then raise it upwards, and gently push the foot upward; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is well; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a stake firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie drapes around it so that it does not move the patient; then hold the ministers by the hip, and other ministers extend the foot to their hands or at the ligament, so that they tie it above the ankle of the foot; then extend each minister equally, and the stakes be firm between the hips of the patient to retain the patient when one is raising; then put the ministers equally the dislocation in their hands, and other ministers hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return readily.   
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is pointed, put the plaster and dressings on top, and strain them firmly, and tie the leg to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligatures are not too tight; then leave him for II days or III, and if the ligatures soften, then strain them again; then untie it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for IIII days; and if he goes before this time limit, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes from there, then it is necessary that you appease it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to gently extend them without effort, and it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a level place or on a table very straight, and put your foot on what opens of these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns; and when it is equal, and there is nothing open, then put under the sole of the foot a table at the shoulder, then strain it firmly, and let it remain for III days, then untie it; and make him rest, until he is healed.  
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and tardy, nor rash; and use at the beginning of things soothing apoplexy hot, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the apoplexy may be on it; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing apoplexy hot, and cure the wound, as it is proper, with dried ointments; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you death according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.  
Amen	So be it 
