O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O thou, dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment; and have brought it to an end by its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And there came unto me in vision that I should complete it for thee with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and has been entirely destroyed throughout, therefore its science has perished and been cut off; and there remains nothing but small descriptions about it in books which hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this ignorance and vanity have come, and intentions are closed and the science has been forgotten.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	But it seems to me that I desire to revive this science together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also to bring the forms of cauterizing irons and other instruments of the work along with their description and preparation, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in this must rise up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the judgment of the members and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement and the moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name with no deed is much, but with a deed it is little; and the same is true in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said above should guard against falling into error and killing men, as I have often seen many do who engage in this science without skill or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut off one aposteme of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; so that so much blood issued forth that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who removed a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to him to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the greatness of the stone; and knew well that if it were cut into he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took in hand the cure of one of our dukes who had his leg broken, and with the break there was also a wound; and the surgeon, full of ignorance, bound the break upon the wound with tight bandages, and did not leave any salve to the wound, and left him thus for some time. And he commanded that it should not be unbound; and so it remained until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and unbind the leg; and when I had it unbound, he felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption was already well established in the member and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the whole limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who burst open an inflamed carbuncle and then burned it through his own wickedness.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a carbuncle, when it is free from melancholic humor, ought not to be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you ought to know that surgery is divided into two parts: that is, the work where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful so that foolish surgeons may not speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore take your arms in hand, and approach your patients lightly and boldly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to health and be praised; and leave difficult diseases alone. And remove your arms from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not undertake the care of serious diseases, lest you be called a foolish surgeon."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about hot cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head down to the feet; and it contains the forms of instruments, the irons for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and puncturing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of splinters and similar things; and it contains the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about reducing dislocations and torsions and similar things; and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and contains the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell you about the quality of the temperament and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of temperaments and their harm is the longest speech and most subtle science, and its secrets are difficult to answer. And about this most wise men have spoken and agreed among themselves. But I will give you few words because I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally every temperament where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely the hot and dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Some people divide the hot and dry temperament with matter into two parts and say that cautery is great help there. But others say the opposite, that cautery is not good for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot,
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it many times through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	But let none meddle therein but he who hath tried it and knows well the book of cauteries by long experience, and the diversities of temperaments in men, their positions and causes of diseases, and seasonable times; concerning other temperaments we have no fear, especially cold moist ones.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, my son, that fire alone is the secret of remedies and has greater efficacy than a cauterizing medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and acts only upon the member which it burns, and does not harm other members if one takes care.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines spread from member to member, causing severe inflammation and sometimes even death.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire does not cause harm due to its height and the goodness of its substance if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the truth of things. Therefore, I apologize for the length of my speech, but I do not wish to deprive you of the secret contained in fire and the quality of its work, as the philosophers demonstrate; now receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed and chose priests.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the evils that occur are prevented by its help. Especially if the cauteries are necessary for sudden and urgent pains which cannot wait until greater mischief comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for a disease cured by cautery has no return. And they say so, but it is not entirely true because cauteries are medicines that alter the complexion and dry up the humors that cause pain, and they are more effective than medicines due to their swift action, virtue of their work, and sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it can happen that diseases arise according to the complexion of the patient and the location and nature of the disease. And they are assembled within him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in places where there is little superfluity or moisture, such as dental cauteries for toothache, etc., and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and indeed they are wrong; but they do not believe that cauteries have value after medicines. Their intentions are false, for when we administer various cures in any disease and they do not work, then we apply cauteries, which are effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that cauteries of gold are gentler than those of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also said that the place where a cautery is applied does not cause decay, but this is not entirely true as I have seen in some people; however, cauteries of gold are indeed milder than those of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Moreover, when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell whether it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly. If you heat it too much in the fire, it will also damage it. Therefore, there are enough obstacles to this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	Therefore, we use cauteries of iron that have been more appropriately prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have arranged this chapter from head to toe so that it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moistness and coldness on the head. There are two types of it made due to the cause of an illness called "soda," and also because of many humors that flow down from the head to the ears and throat, causing numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness like paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is as follows: the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine that opens up the head for three or four nights, depending on the strength and age and constitution of the patient. Then apply the cautery to the back of the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have the patient sit crossed-legged between your hands and place their hands on their knees. Then place the root of your palm on the root of the patient's nose between their two ears. Wherever your middle fingers come together, make an incision there and then apply the cautery called "olivare" which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and press down gently but firmly while turning your hand back and forth. Then lift your hand slowly, and wait a moment to see if you can see the bone of about one inch in length; if not, then continue applying the cautery until you do see the bone as I have told you. Then take a small piece of wool, dip it into soft cotton, and place it on the spot and leave it for three days. After that, put moistened cotton soaked in butter on top of it and let it stay there until the burn is healed. Then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is completely healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that the more open the wound remains, the better it purges itself. Therefore, this cautery helps greatly with that.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	Some also say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what has been burned from the bone and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Others say that one should leave the cautery on and press it so hard that a piece of bone about as large as a thread used for sewing by women is scraped off, so that humors can flow out more freely. Then the wound should be left open for a long time before being dressed and bandaged.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	But these two methods of cautery do not seem entirely good to me except in some cases where there is a risk of paralysis. Therefore, it seems best to leave them alone. Because the flesh becomes weakened by continuous solutions of nature as we see in other members, and especially when the flesh of the patient is naturally weak, the first method of cautery appears more cautious and gentle to me, and that is the one I use most often with good results.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	For chronic headache
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When a chronic pain comes in the whole head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use pills called "cochies," purgatives for the head, ointments, and plasters. If one applies the cautery I mentioned earlier without success.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be careful if the patient's flesh is strong and not too cold in nature, then apply the cautery a little below where you applied the one mentioned earlier.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, apply a cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone, as mentioned earlier, and apply one cautery to the spot called "vasselz," which is where cupping glasses are placed. Be careful not to press too hard so as not to burn down to the bone: the patient feels more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about it later. The cauteries on the horns should be finer than those used for the middle of the head, and here is their form:
dou cautere dou chief	"Of the cautery of the head,"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and the illness spreads as far as the eye, and the flesh has been purged with medicines that cleanse it, and all the other treatments I have mentioned in the division of illnesses have been performed but they do not help at all: then cauteries are applied according to two methods, namely those made of medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot medicine is performed as follows: take a handful of dried basil leaves, remove their outer skin and crush them into powder; then make an incision in the temple where the pain is felt so that you can place the handful of basil leaves beneath the skin. Then bind it tightly and leave it like that for twelve hours. After that, untie it and remove the basil leaves and let the wound remain open for two or three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter over it until it closes up.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed with ointment, if you wish to apply any burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on treating burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cautery of iron is performed as follows: heat the cautery, which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a closed lock with a slight curve and a small indentation in the middle. Place it on the painful area and turn the fire gently until half of the point of the cautery has been burned; then lift your hand so that only the artery, which is located outside, is burned, and allow an abundant flow of blood to come forth.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, apply cotton soaked in water of salt on the wound for three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter over it and treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely. If you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cutellare," which is pointed at both ends, be careful not to cut the artery that runs through this migraine if it is not an ancient one.
de emigraine	de migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	If you are treating migraine as we have previously discussed in the section on diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries made of medicine and iron do not help, then you must heat the cautery called "cutellare" until it turns white. Then quickly place it on the painful area and trace a line about half an inch long with it, making sure not to cut the artery or go all the way down to the bone. Be careful not to harm the jawbone which moves when chewing, and make sure that the patient does not move their neck so as not to cause spasm or fright. If there is heavy bleeding from the artery after cutting it, do not panic, especially if you are not familiar with this procedure or have not practiced it before. Leave the wound open for now, but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery has been cut and show you where it can be found in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you find that these cauteries do not help with the illness and the patient is suffering, then cauterize them on the head as we have described earlier, and treat the wound until it heals completely. If you wish to use a cautery that has been mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, then use one with two blades; this cautery is better than the previous one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Chapter 49: On the Pain of the Ears Due to Coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear and one has opened medicinal solutions there and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, but the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery called "point":
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and then move it a little away from the root of the ear since you have marked the spot; and use ten points on each ear; afterwards clean the spot until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the Torture of the Mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cautery is only that which moves with phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform cauterization on those that come from sore and sores.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you are treating this type of torture that moves with phlegm from dryness and purging of the head and gargling, and these remedies do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery mark on top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger's width; and leave the cautery there until half of the kernel is burned; this is the form of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the form of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary for the knife to be slightly larger; afterwards clean the spot as I said earlier until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have said, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot that is called "vessels" as we have mentioned earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and cure it as we have said before.
de litargie	de la litargie
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large ointments and pills made from mignonette to cleanse the brain. Afterwards, shave the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed in this way, good; and if not, perform three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure it as the others, and if you see it join together, and the patient is suffering, then perform one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, perform two more on the two horns, and cure it until it is healed; and these cauteries are called "olivary," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Pour traire la froideur du chef, il covient mettre li malaides en un lit bien chauffez et bien couverts, et doner lui un bains d’herbes chaudes, c’est à dire verveine et sauge et chouli ou chous vert; aprés doner lui yeres de graisse doree sur le chief, puis li met sus la teste ung emplaustre de canelle et de girofle en poudre mis en un lit dou pain; puis li fai .iij. cauteres emmi le chief comme j’ai dit devant.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The chief must be cleansed of hairs and of that which we have said before. After this, raise the patient's head, then apply cauteries within the chief and upon each horn, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is severe, apply four cauteries upon the spine of the back. Leave them until the best of the heart is burned, then lift your hand; afterward care until it is healed, and let the cautery which is called 'olivare' be that which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not apply cauteries except for the phlegmatic type. First, cleanse the brain of hairs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and capable of taking medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, perform gargarism and mastication to cleanse the brain often with good foods. After that, raise the child's head in the middle, and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery upon the vessel, and upon each horn; and if the patient is severe and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and weakness of body, upon the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is the presence of superfluities or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then apply cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is that superfluities tend towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient, take one well-made linen cloth, like a circle, and place it on the head. The patient should sit crossed-legged and be held securely on all sides. Then present the linen and pour melted sheep's butter onto it. Heat the butter gradually over a fire so that the dough can withstand it. Afterward, empty the circle inside the head and let it cool. Do this once each week with other good treatments until the patient is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you wish to cauterize the head by making several punctures along the entire cautery, this method moistens the brain excessively. Instead, apply cotton soaked in butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	For the treatment of eye pain
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain first comes to the eyes due to the signs that I have mentioned in the division, begin by giving the patient something to drink that cleanses the head and guards against all moistures. Make him sweat or take baths several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After him, he commands to raise his head, and makes a cautery on the head, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the water is at the two eyes together, or one if the descent is at one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the heart with every cautery, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauterization, how you will perform it; and never do cautery or burn beneath the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead outside; and one sees that it is cold, superfluous fluid, then he makes the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the descending aqueous humor to the eyes: one cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or burns beneath the two bones behind; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes skillfully above the eyebrow with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the aqueous humor descends inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then give the sick person three cooked chickens to drink after; then raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrow ridges; and beware of cutting the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper (sclera) of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary". Here is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit to make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there until a third of the paper (sclera) is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Regarding the hair that points at the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn towards the partedens and prick the eye, and cauteries are made in two ways for this: either by fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their origin, he should restrain his eyes so that they do not move until they have grown.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then the patient should lay on his back; after that, he should draw a figure on the paper of the eyes like a mirror's surface, with its beginning near the hairs; then place cotton soaked in egg white and groundsel on the eye, and afterwards heat the cautery which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing gently several times on the figure you have drawn, so that the skin is burnt at that spot; and the sign of the work's healthiness is when you see the paper recede and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days; afterwards place cotton soaked in butter until the burn has healed; finally treat with ointment until it is completely healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back and the paper is softened, then begin again with the cautery on that same spot as you did first; and if the hairs are defective, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural level, becomes even, and does not prick the eye anymore.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medicinal cautery is performed by commanding the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape like the leaf of a myrtle. Next, take three each of frankincense and white wax, grind them together well, and make it quickly so that it does not cool; then spread it on the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, place it on the paper of the eyes; if the patient has only one eye affected, work on one, and if both are affected, do both as well. Place cotton soaked in egg white underneath the eye, and let the patient lie on their back with their two hands pointing towards the medicine, pressing gently each time the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, for it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	After you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the sensation has passed, then lift the eye cover and observe if you see the paper raised as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or incision; and if it is so, then all is well. If not, then apply more medicine on the spot where the medicine did not work, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp; then place cotton soaked in butter until the burnt skin has healed, after that treat the eye with the ointment called "diaphoresis" and others, until it is completely healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be very careful with your work so that no medicine falls into the eye. And if the paper becomes soft afterward and the hairs prick the eye, then begin again with the medicine on that spot where the paper is softened properly, just as you did before; after that treat until it is completely healed. This is the form of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this adjust your cautery; and do not stray from the right path that one who learns this art should follow.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform a cautery on it in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place their head in your hand; and hold the patient's head between your hands so that they do not move or turn their head. After that, place cotton soaked in egg white or in persimmon juice on the eye. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like this: it is pointed at the top like a dovecot roof tile, with the point being the cautery itself; if you see, then it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, then it should also be like a tent; but in any case, this shape is most useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After that, press the fistula if it is open and remove the pus from it and dry it. And if it is closed, then open it and draw out fluid from it. After that place the hot cautery on it and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the eye closest to the nose so that your hand does not tremble. Then insert the cautery into the fat of the eye and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you reach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, then that would be good. If not, then begin the cautery again once more and another time if necessary, leaving it for three days. After that place cotton soaked in butter on it and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed. And if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and according to what comes out of its channel.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is another method of cautery for fistula that some of the ancients spoke about. Understand about fistula and cut it open; after that place one small clove, shaped like this:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it the size of a grain of pepper. Then hold your hand on the clove firmly and do not let the patient move their nose so that the melted wax does not run into their eye. And it is necessary to place cotton soaked in egg whites or in water on the patient's eye. The wax will then seal the fistula, and will heal it with wonderful speed.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, then that is good. If not, then it is necessary to make a puncture in the nose and bring the fistula back into its proper place inside the nose according to what is necessary for each one's own case.
des crevaices en levres	Regarding cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks appear on the lips which are called "cracks," and especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place him immediately in those crevices until it reaches the source; afterwards, cleanse the wound with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it produces putrefaction and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the sections, but it does not improve: then it is necessary for you to apply one cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, close or pierce the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the source of it on the inside; and do this once or twice, after that treat it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	on toothache
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it is not effective, then place the head of the sick person on your lap; afterwards heat the cautery whose shape will come later in this manner, so that you place a pipe over the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand until the sick person feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and begin the cautery again according to your desire; afterwards, have the sick person fill their mouth with salted water, and keep it there for an hour and then spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was loose is made firm again, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	on toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, where there is coldness or truth, and the remedies of medicine do not suffice, then there is need for a cautery in two ways: cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from cow's milk and put it on the tip of an iron or brass spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a thread, and moisten it in boiling butter, and quickly place it on the painful tooth until it cools down; and do this often so that its effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see that the wool and cotton are moistened with cold butter, put them on the aching tooth, and put a red-hot iron over it until the fire reaches the neck of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cauteries should be such that you take one of iron or brass, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth. After heating the cautery, as described below, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down; do this often, for the pain will be alleviated on that same day or the next. And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then rub it in; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	Make a cautery of whatever size you wish, depending on your skill level; here is the shape of the cautery
des scrophules	for boils
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When boils are of hot and moist nature, and are not yielding to treatment with medicines, then heat the cautery described below, which has two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side; place the heated cautery on the boil once or twice until it reaches the center of the boil. If the boil is small, adjust the size of the cautery accordingly and leave it in place for three days. Then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed. After that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moist humors prevail in the channels of the lungs, especially when it arises from a cold complexion, the patient should first be treated with solvents. Then perform a cautery at the root of the throat, taking care not to reach too close to the throat and not to burn the heart but only slightly. After that, perform another cautery at the junction of the neck and head, using a cautery called "clavile," for which we have the shape described earlier. Treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed, as described previously.
de la toust	de la toux
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When coughing and lung disease are caused by cold moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or shortness of breath, and the condition is chronic, perform two cauteries on the skin over the lungs. Then perform another cautery between the breasts, near the nipples, using a cautery called "clavile" according to the shape described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see that the pain is severe, perform a cautery using the cautery called "poins," for which the shape is described earlier in the section on ear diseases. Use this cautery to prick all around the affected area, up to thirty or forty times. After that, treat the wound as described previously, using a cautery with three points according to the following shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are easier to perform, you should make three incisions at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	de la dislocation de l'épaule
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the arm bone is dislocated due to moist humors and is repositioned but keeps slipping back and becomes dislocated again even with slight movements, as we have experienced, it is necessary to first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, have the patient lie on their back and side. Then lift the chest with the palms of your hands. If the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two points as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	"and cauterize the lung until it pierces to the side, and there would be four cauteries from the cautery figure; and therefore it is done with the cautery that has three nerves, for which reason the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:"
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	"And sometimes it is attached above this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries."
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	"Then put on the cautery quickly broken with a thread; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well comforted."
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	"And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries piercingly. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healthy."
dou cautere de pleuresin	"of the cautery for pleurisy"
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	"The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries with roots of aristologus, and in this manner: take a root of aristologus long, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and also thick and as long as your two fingers; and moisten it in oil, and put it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little descending in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclined backwards a little; and one cautery amidst the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the two sides of the breast before the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do openly just as in smelling."
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	"And some ancient ones said that some people used cauteries like a razor's edge, and they heat it up and put it between the ribs until it comes to this aposteme; and when the pain is gone, just as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or that a fistula will come which cannot be healed."
de la mice	"of the mouse"
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cauterization that are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these, the first method is as follows: you should make three or four cauteries along the length of the mouse according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have described earlier; do not press your hand too hard during the entire cautery process, and ensure that the patient remains lying on their back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	"And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is near the breastbone, where the rib cage of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the heart be according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the width of the body."
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	"After that, insert the two inflamed nerves until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, so there will be four. And if you wish, you can cauterize with the entire cautery having three nerves. After the treatment, when the gangrene has been cast off for a long time, this method is better than the others mentioned before."
de ydropisie	"of dropsy"
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	"A cautery is not good for a dropsical person, except in the manner which is called 'ascites'. When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help at all, then you must make four cauteries around the belly button, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the breastbone, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the nipple; and let the cauteries be very close to the space of the heart."
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	"Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to cast out putrefaction, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient afterwards; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will be together with the help of God."
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	"The form of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we have shown before, which is a key-shaped; and those for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been put forth beforehand."
de l’enfleure des piez	"of the swelling of the feet"
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	"When the feet are swollen in a dropsical person and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not enter too deeply in case you burn the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this shape:"
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	"Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shinbone; and let the cauteries be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind it, in the middle of the leg. Leave the cauteries open for a long time without treating them, until the water comes out. After that, treat with the other methods that we have mentioned."
de la menoison	"of pleurisy"
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	"When pleurisy comes from coldness and moisture to such an extent that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about before regarding the cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery. And make four small cauteries around the navel, each the size of a small key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries on the hips."
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	"And if you see that there are abundant moistures and the patient is suffering greatly, then make a cautery on the point of the chest, one cautery on each armpit, and two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach, for the treatment is profitable when there is good help."
de la cure des emorroydes	"of the treatment of hemorrhoids"
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and are old and are large cold moist corrupt humors, and are treated as we have said in sections, but there is no benefit, then apply cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that one which is completely behind the bladder in a triangular fashion, little by little, and one cautery below the buttock. Two days.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and the face swells up, then apply one large cautery on the stomach as it is stated above, and another on the liver, and one on the muscle with a full cautery; leave the cautery on for a long time. Then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshy tissue called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you remove the fleshy tissue called "thelul", if it is inflamed use a cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it completely burning on that removed piece of flesh; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the root of the vein, from which blood comes forth. Do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshy tissue, cauterize each one as we have described; afterwards profit from the care of ointments until they are healed. And if you cauterize with a large cautery on fleshy flesh, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure being cut or opened, which we will describe in its proper place, then comes such an illness that it can only be healed by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula occurs and is inflamed and filled with corruption and putrid moisture, you should probe it completely with a thin probe, ensuring that you know the full depth of the tunnel. Afterwards heat the cautery that resembles a razor and insert it into the fistula according to its depth, and continue using the cautery until all the rotting flesh is burned away, once, or twice, or three times depending on what is needed; be careful not to burn the nerves nearby, nor the large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestines, be careful about those places and do not perform this procedure unless in a narrow place, thinking that it should not pierce through. Afterwards treat the wound until it heals completely, and if the wound is dry and the materials have been removed for some time, then know that the wound has healed entirely; but if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is too deep and rotting bone lies beneath; and so on as we will describe in its proper place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the loins, and there is great windiness, and no menstrual flow,
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and flaccid due to coldness and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make cauteries on the part below the bladder, where the hair of the pubis begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, each cautery being about the length of a hazelnut; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if necessary; and let the cauteries be nail-shaped according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the menstruation is corrupted with delayed onsets accompanied by great pain upon arrival, then make three cauteries around the vulva as previously mentioned for bladder cauteries, and two cauteries behind the back; let the cauteries be nail-shaped as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the beard
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the beard's bag, causing it to become displaced from its usual position, with the sign being that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together, and the place of separation is found empty; then cauterize the patient above the beard's bag with a circular cautery, encircling the bag around its base before cutting into it, so that the bag is within the circle; let the cautery be like those used for stomach cauteries.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, then make three large olive-shaped cauteries around the base of the beard's bag, with each cautery being as deep as all the others; let the cautery be clean.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the beard[TOOL_CALLS]Quant tu sentirás grant dolor en la boiste de ta hainche, si prent une plume de penne de galline et la met sus la boiste de ta hainche, et le meins que tu puedras souffrir; et quant tu auras ainsi soffert tant qu’il te puisse plaire, tu laisseras cheoir hors de ta boiste de hainche une gotte de ton sang. Adonques covient que tu fache .ij. cauteres environ la boiste de la hainche, si com nous avons dit ou cautere de la vessie.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip bone,
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards one performs the cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: namely, hot medicines together, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize upon the box of the haunch three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them of good depth and wide, and have between each cautery a space the size of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle upon the head of the haunch, whereby there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, then cauterize upon the cautery of the circle which we have spoken about beforehand in the dislocation of the haunch; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all of the haunch, and all the thickness of the bone is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the manner that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the haunch and does not reach the thigh nor the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then one makes two cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers on the left side; and let the cauteries be cutellar-shaped, and let the thickness of the bone be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four points at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, then one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cutellar or circular cautery there, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave too much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who made cauteries upon the ankle of the foot, and they left them so much that the leg became all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted altogether the whole foot. Afterward a flux of the belly caused his death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And the wise say concerning the cautery of the haunch, this is the manner: make one such iron as big at the head as a hazelnut kernel, or a little less, and let it be with notches and let the notches be spaced from one to another like the thickness of a pea; and let the notches be on both sides and also like nuts, and there should be one main part of iron well-made; and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red-hot and glowing hot, and then place it on the sick haunch bone, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery, and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterward cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regret, and few who use it. Nevertheless, it is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured where it affects.
de la dolor dou dos	for the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar symptoms of spread-out cold matter, none of these symptoms warrant cauteries except that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has been voided of fetid pills or other such things, that one make upon his back where the pain holds three lines signed with a compass, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you see fit, make three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle bone according to this shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have narrow urine when they rise up, and fear; and you find on the back spine and in our appearance which comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize with the cautery of the navel according to this shape:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the cautery covers each part of the spine evenly. And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery two or three lines apart, and let the points be near one another. Afterward cure it with leeches until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care that you do not bring cauteries into gibbosity which is in spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	for the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the feet, which doctors properly call "podagry," and when it is of cold cause and cannot be cured by medications, then it is treated with cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this shape.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary to press on the face of the foot, make one cautery for each cautery that is called a "point." And if the pains extend up to the knees and to other joints, which happens often, make three or four cauteries on each knee joint, each cautery being olive oil; and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand too far out until the space of an inch is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, administer the cautery that we have spoken about in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two finger-widths; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the sick person and give medications. For if you take good care of them and purge phlegm, they will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Here is the recipe for a poultice for the spleen:
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When an inflammation of the spleen comes on suddenly, and the bowels descend to the groin, and it is newly come upon, then it is necessary that when you see him to cure, that he not eat that day; and that he use things that leave the belly, so that the wind may descend from his belly. Afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to stretch out his arm as much as the bowels are repaired, and hold the sinew in your two hands, and press down hard beneath the spleen on the bone of the elbow, and there make a sign like half a circle above the body. Then heat the cautery which has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and gives off sparks. Then put the bowels back in their place, and the minister shall hold his hand upon them that they do not return backward. Then open the thighs of the sick person well, and put a cushion and a servant under him on the thighs, and another one under his chest to hold his hands. Then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, both your right hand and your left, until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again until you come to the bone. And be careful that the bowels do not slip out when you make the cautery, lest you burn them; and lest by this the sick person die or suffer some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	"Know that when you do not reach the bone with a cautery, your efforts are worthless. And it is necessary that cauteries for children be thin according to their size, and for large people they should also be large according to their measure; afterwards, three days after the cautery, treat the place with butter until the scalding is gone; afterwards, treat with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his fasting be prolonged so that his eyes do not bulge when he tries to get up to go to bed."
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	"And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him have a well-made splint ready for him and wear it for forty more days; and let him rest well, so that he works little and takes care not to overindulge in drinking and eating, or raise his voice too high. And when this instruction is followed, he will be entirely healed. I will discuss the treatment of cutting in its chapter."
de la routure dou ventre	"Of the rupture of the abdomen"
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	"When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any further, make one cautery cut with the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; afterwards treat according to what we have said; and some of the ancients say that it should be cauterized at three angles in this shape:"
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	"but first mark the spot of the beginning and make a line across the width above the rupture and another below it, and then cut around the entire cautery with a scalpel. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler."
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	"Of old pain in some limb"
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb,
de meselerie	Of dislocations
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If the dislocation occurs several times due to cautery and is particularly severe, it may be caused by inflammation of the brain resulting from putrefaction of phlegm or black bile. If you suspect that cauterization has not been performed correctly at the beginning of the illness, and if there are doubts about whether the cure has been carried out according to our instructions in this section, and if the disease remains uncured and unchanging, then perform five cauteries on top of the head: one in the middle of the forehead, another towards the front between the eyebrows; two on either side of the horns; one behind the occupit; make sure your hand is placed so that the cautery reaches the bone and causes blisters to form, allowing the fumes from the thick humors to escape; and perform cauterization on the mouth according to what is described above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the dislocation is widespread and clearly apparent, it is necessary to perform cauteries as described above on top of the head, one near the nose, two on either side of the neck spine, five on the back spine, one large one on the stomach and another nearby, two on each shoulder blade, two on the ribs, two on the inner arms, one on each wrist joint and hand pit, and also cauterize behind the feet. Be careful not to burn any nerves located at the back of the legs, and perform one cautery on the ulna bone and another on the stomach bone, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cauteries you perform, the greater help you provide and benefit it brings; and know that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because their body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find described in books on iron techniques. Afterwards, treat the site with buckwheat flour mixed with honey and other cures until it heals.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but is not cured, then perform cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness. The cautery should be slightly inserted into the flesh of the heart; afterwards treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is performed on the hand, foot, or back at the exit point of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus inflammation is removed. However, no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	of white spots
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a slightly deep cautery according to the thickness of the flesh. Continue until the white spot is removed and its color returns to normal. Then treat it with buckwheat flour and lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, pigeon blood, and swallow's blood (equal parts each). Mix everything together, tie it in a cloth, and apply it to the site until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it halt, then cauterize it with the cautery that resembles a circle, all around the chancre's perimeter. And although some wise men say one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, as it has happened before on several occasions; and it is more advisable that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said regarding many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it is delayed in dying, either due to the excessiveness that it causes or due to the frailty of the sick person when they are very old (that is, too elderly) and have little blood, or due to the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries pricking sharply; afterward leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced all through the cautery, then heat the cautery which is shaped like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of that illness called 'adubelati', until the cauteries have pierced the heart, and make the cauteries such that the sick person feels drawn outwards in this manner so that the course of corruption is alleviated. Afterward, heal him until he is perfectly sound.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	There is another kind of disease called "corrodens", which is nothing but a consumption of the limb, for it consumes the limbs just like fire consumes dry logs. If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cauterization by fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the affected area; afterwards, cauterize all around until you have removed all corruption, leaving nothing remaining that is corrupted. Then leave it for three days, and apply compresses with crushed plants mixed with oil so as to remove the burns from fire and all corruption. After that, use ointments that promote flesh growth. And if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, then recommence cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs. Sometimes this consumption has been cured by means of hot medicine instead of cauterization by fire; but nevertheless cauterization by fire is more helpful, and I have already spoken about the cure using hot medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of the moles that come upon the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times there occurs at the feet a disease called "claw" according to our understanding, which is a large, broken thing that wounds the foot. And there are two cauterizations for this disease: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating an iron needle until it glows like a coal, then placing it on the nail so that it surrounds the entire nail with subtle margins; keep your hand moving around the nail until you reach the tip of the nail; leave it in place for three days until it begins to ooze pus. Then make a poultice of crushed mallows with oil and let it sit overnight, and the nail will fall out and be removed from its roots. Then apply healing ointment made from ground-up earthworms daily until the wound is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	"If the [hairs] are turned away from the body and this happens frequently in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery of hot water; and it is done thus: take a pipe of brass or iron, or a goose feather, and place it on thewart and the other, that is to say on warts; and place the pipe on it so that it encompasses all around, then put some hot water inside, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the pipe comes to the root of the Wart, and may find a profound path for the hot water even unto the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will deroot itself entirely with all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you have rooted out all those that are on the body, then heal them with ointments that produce flesh."
li cure dou trembler	"the treatment for trembling"
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	"If some [person] trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [fever], then you must make for them four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery; then the trembling will cease, and the health will hasten the cold sickness."
des pustules puans	"putrid pustules"
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	"Sometimes on the body appear baths or smelly pustules that come from large corrupted matters. Therefore, as soon as they appear, one should make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a fine juniper wood cautery, whose tip has been heated in fire, or long aristologist root, or lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further but the excess from which they come is disrupted, and they become clean. However, this should be done after blood evacuation."
quant li artere est copee	"When the artery is severed"
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surroundings, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And moreover, when this happens to anyone, you should quickly put your two index fingers on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is calmed under your fingers, and no more drops come out; then heat some small and large olive cauteries in the fire until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is spent, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the bleeding has stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the sick person. And know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be easily stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by strongly tying a thread, or by medicines put on that have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and bound properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	And those who bring about stopping of bleeding by tying very tightly with cloths or putting hot things on top, or other similar things, do little good if any at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then one should put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press very hard until it stops above the wound and the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often, making it as cold as possible until the blood is frozen and solidified and stopped. And then do what is necessary with cauteries and medicines afterward.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the surgeries for slashing wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	In the first chapter, we have told you about all diseases in which fire cautery or burning medicine is necessary, and their causes, instruments, and forms. And I have put that chapter from head to foot, so that one can find more easily what one wants in this chapter by following the same path.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this chapter, dear friend, you should know that there is more danger and fear in this chapter on cauteries than in the first one, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the practice of this chapter there is often much loss of blood when opening veins, making incisions on tumors, treating wounds, extracting splinters, and making incisions on stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die as a result.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	"And I advise you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for treatment, some who are so attached to their illness that they die easily because of the frenzy that their disease brings them, and from the greatness of their folly; and these ones one should fear."
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	"And there are some who give their sense to it and say: 'Wait, I am cured'; but the disease is deceitful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely for what you are certain of, and from which you can have taken and praise; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that they may be converted to health; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise."
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear child, Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with His holy breath, Amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"Or I have arranged this chapter for you by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries which I have already arranged from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"A full head of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	"Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the head of the child is too tightly constricted; but sometimes it happens from a hidden cause that one does not know."
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	"And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all those whom I have seen it occurred suddenly; therefore it seems to me that it is not fitting for me to leave out the treatment of such cases."
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	"And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so that he could not support it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture gathered under the bone above the syphac, between the heart and the bone. And if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a wide opening in the head, as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out." Here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	"If the moisture has grown more and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:"
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	"And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that the angles of the head are raised on each side, and water spurts out when you press it with your hand inside, but this has not been revealed to you: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:"
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	"And after the incision has been made, remove all the moisture outside. Then press the incisions with bandages and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days. Then unbind it, and cure the wound by tents and poultices, and keep the head bound evenly, and give the sick person dry food to eat until the member is strengthened and healed."
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	"And another manner of incision is to look where the aperture of the swelling appears, and where the gathering of water is; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left."
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	"Therefore cut there where the swelling appears and the gathering of water is, and make the incision according to what you have the power to do. And take care not to cut into the artery; otherwise a great vein of blood will flow out, so that the sick person dies from bleeding and evacuation of moisture."
de reume	"of boils"
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a person contracts an illness called "cataract" in the eyes or the foot, and if that illness is chronic, and medical treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with two arteries being tied off.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you tie off the arteries, the patient should lie down with their head back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible. After that, twist one cloth around the patient's neck; next, look for where the veins are located, which are usually behind the ears and close to each other. Then mark these locations with incisions, after which cut both arteries using a sharp spatula at two points, cutting deep down to the bone level, ensuring it is wide enough for the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see one artery, insert the spatula underneath it and cut it from above at two points across its width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	Once the vein is cut, blood will flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling it, you must measure a space of three fingers and mark an incision down to the bone level; usually about six ounces of blood should be let out, but this may vary depending on what the patient can endure and the fullness of the artery. Afterward, examine the wound: if there is still some flesh sticking up like a syphac point, cut it off so that no part remains raw, then press the wound shut and bandage it until healed with ointment.
de emigrainne	"de emigrainne" translates to "of migraine".
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient migraine comes on, accompanied by catarrh and severe headache with moist eyes, heat in the temples, and other such disturbances which do not improve with medical treatment, then it is necessary to tie off the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of tying off these arteries is for the patient to shave their temples and find the artery that can be felt pulsing in the temple. If it is not visible, the patient should tie a cloth around their head, then rub the area with a rough cloth until the artery becomes visible. Then apply warm water to the area until the artery appears clearly. Next, take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then gently cut through the skin until you reach the artery. Next, grasp it with forceps and carefully separate it from the tissues beneath it on both sides. If the artery is thin, use the point of a nail to twist around it before cutting off one part according to the width of two fingertips. For if it is not cut all the way through, blood will not flow freely out completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And let out six ounces of blood, up to three. If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong silk thread to prevent infection before the wound heals and ensure continuous bleeding. Then cut off any excess tissue between the two ties immediately afterward. Afterward, if necessary, cauterize the cut with a hot iron down to the bone level so that the flesh is sealed completely; this should be done only if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery helps to stop bleeding: therefore it is more helpful for stopping moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When performing the tying off of arteries, it is important to fill the area with cotton and place well-made bandages on top. After removing the bandages, apply dry medications that promote tissue growth and more bandages until healed. If bleeding occurs from the artery while working, quickly cauterize with a hot iron or use vitriol and press your hand over it until the bleeding stops. Alternatively, press your thumb onto the area to freeze the blood, then rinse with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and tie off as necessary. A simpler method is to use a cautery that cuts in two places but has wide edges to retain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it retains its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be one thumb's width of space between the two knives, then when you have marked the two places to cut with hot iron, hold it against the skin until it reaches the bone. Cut through the flesh at both marks, but keep them a finger's width apart because the cautery does not seal completely along its entire length; here is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from the eyes flow down into the channels above the brow of the head, and no medication applied brings relief, and you observe the patient's face becoming redder with heat and tension felt in their forehead like tremors; if these tears are thin and moist so that the hair around the eyes falls out and the skin becomes hot and raw from the flow of tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And this treatment was called by the ancients "contusion cure", and it involves making three incisions on the forehead of the patient affected by this condition: one down the middle of the forehead from eyebrow to nose, and two others at each side above the eyes, being careful not to cut into any arteries present there. Avoid the area near the jaws and make each incision about three finger widths across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have prepared some sponges and plenty of cloths to wipe away blood, then insert the spatula shaped like this:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Into the incision that runs from the temple to the second incision, and scrape away all the fat between the two cuts down to the bone of the face. Then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then insert into the first incision the instrument called "the curette", which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other. Here is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And place the sharp blade towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt side toward the bone, and press until it reaches the middle furrow. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous right up to those that open from the heart, and then do likewise in the middle furrow up to the other end; and then extract blood evenly, and squeeze the area for the taken blood; then place a bandage of old cotton in each furrow, and lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and honey on top, ensuring no pus comes close; and on the third day untie the bandage, and apply abundant water from the red mallow plant, then treat with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed."
dou reume des eulz	"of the eyes"
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	"When catarrh comes on repeatedly, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weaken the sight, and the membranes burned; and the hair falls out, and deep in the head there is feverish pain, and the sick sneezes; then know by these signs that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy for what is inside is as follows."
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	"And it is that you command the sick to lie on their back, then make a large incision across the forehead and another one wide. 1 pc. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the muscles of the temples that move when chewing; and when the bone is exposed, then wipe out all the blood with a sponge, and then open between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton and linen bandages inside; then lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and guard against hot pus; when it is healed, then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with drying substances that cause flesh to form."
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	"In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout."
de l’estoupement des oreilles	"about the blocking of the ears"
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	"All that falls into the ears is one of four things: seeds, an animal, a stone or something similar like iron; grains such as peas, beans, chickpeas; or flowing substances like water and mucus and similar things."
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	"When something like a stone or another kind of thing falls into the ear that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, place the ear toward the sun. If you see the stone, then drip a little violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and when doing so, make them sneeze with condurango, and hold their nostrils closed when they sneeze, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and tilt the ear upward. Many times it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer extraction with delicate forceps, of which here is the shape:"
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	"If it jumps out with the forceps, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a delicate hook of small size; and if it does not jump out through this, then make a tube of lead and put the end of the tube into the hole of the ear very strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that wind cannot enter with the tube; then try to extract it forcefully, for many times it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, then take glue which birds use, and put some on an instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever thing it may be, and try to extract it."
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it does not come out with all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before hot pus and spasm come, and the manner of cutting is this: first make the sick person drink cephalic water and remove blood according to their strength, then make the sick person sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon so that you can reach the stone, then extract it according to your power, and suck it out quickly into your mouth; and continue treating until they are healed."
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	"And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer 1 thin, delicate spoon according to this shape:"
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	"and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with delicate forceps and suck it out, as we have said, so that the extraction is complete."
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	"Therefore, in the case of water that falls into the ear, it behooves the sick person to use condurango sneezing first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them lie down on the same ear where the water is. If it comes out through this, that is good. If not, then take many thin and light stones according to the length of your thumb, heat them a little in the fire; and have the sick person insert one stone into the hole of their ear, and jump up on the other side with another stone, and strike one stone against the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this from stone to stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will all come out; and if you see, take 1 reed, and put one end into the ear, and hold the other end near the fire until the reed burns up; then repeat with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said in the case of stones."
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	"In the extraction of an animal, if it is small in body, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that it can be felt, then administer extraction with forceps; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear."
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	"In the extraction of earthworms that enter the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and the cure does not help at all, then it behooves you to look at the ear toward the sun: if no worms appear, then extract them with delicate forceps; and if none are seen, then take the tube of which this is the shape:"
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	"And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the more delicate end into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the sick person, then suck strongly all along the tube; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, then stop around the tube with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not jump out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the case of worms, and you will find them in treating distillations; and so distill your oils and medicines into the ear through all this instrument, of which this is the shape as you see:"
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let there be silver or narrow-bore bronze beneath a small hole, and above it to drip through; and for pressing during distillation use one well-made bronze tool for this purpose, and if you wish take one razor and wrap cotton around its point carefully; then pour your oil or juice into the tube along with whatever medicines you wish, placing the tube in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton into the ear, and press your hand temperately until the oil has distilled well from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be one small heated pot over the fire before distilling it into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of earplugs
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and the same thing happens with adults through injury to the ear or birth of flesh inside it, and these pluggings sometimes occur deep within the ear so that one cannot see them; sometimes there is a hole missing the aperture, which can be seen well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore the one that comes deep within, so that it cannot be seen, is difficult to treat in many conditions. And for that one which can be seen you should put the patient's ear to the sun and look inside: if you see the opacity clearly, then this is all that this remedy will accomplish among those mentioned here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	"And it should be sharp and cutting both front and back, entirely full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the growth is of flesh born on the body of the ear, hold it with fine pincers, and cut lightly until all that flesh has been removed."
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	"And if the growth is deeply embedded in the ear, take one fine razor and heat it a little on the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you sense the growth which the patient feels gritty when hearing, cut lightly, taking care not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a bandage according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment."
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Continue doing this for a few days until the wound is healed. Then take a bandage and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; if you see the ear swollen, then it must be that you draw out the bandage and replace it with another moistened in cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. Then cure it until it is sound."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	"And if bleeding begins to flow, then dip a sponge and wring it out in cold water, and place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop bleeding which are found in treatises on distillation."
de la char des papieres	"de la chair des papieres"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This balm that comes on papers from the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must stretch it with tweezers and forceps, and cut off its roots with a spatula; then put powdered vitriol on the place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it does not dry out, then cauterize it with a small round cautery and the cautery should be moved after the incision. And many times they are repaired because something remains of their roots; but when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times things come on papers from the eyes that resemble hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of thick moisture on the paper above and below. The treatment is as follows: be careful if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know; then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then grasp it with forceps and cut it off. If you cannot cut it off without piercing the paper a little, do not worry about the patient; and if the slit is large, then sew it up, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use any force, because ointments will restore it soon and make it flesh-colored again.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hail descends into the ear towards the top part, turn over the paper, and grasp the hail with forceps and cut it off and press on both sides; and if the paper is pushed back by the incision, do not worry about it. And when the hail has been cut off, rinse the eye with saltwater and cure the place until the patient is healed with flesh-colored skin.
de la graisse des eulz	de la graisse des eulz
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a grease that is inserted into the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more in children than in others, and it greatly hurts their eyes, and they have catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and because of this they lie on their faces all the time, and sleep like that, and their papers are under their eyelashes moist, which causes swelling and appearance has been covered by the exinach that opens in the eye. And when you press there with your fingers and feel the exirnach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of operating is that the patient puts their head on your hand, and then takes one linen cloth, prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then places it on them; and presses with their fingers on both sides so that the exirnach gathers within the circle; then cuts with the spatula knife a slit in the middle moisturizing it, not too large but like the wound made in the vein of wine; and cuts the skin deeply until you reach the exirnach; and from various directions comes exirnach from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take out all at once a piece of cloth soaked between your fingers and wipe it back and forth with your hand from right to left until it is spread; and make sure that you do not insert in the slit, so that you do not get all the spatula up to the eye, so that you do not cut it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit lightly until it appears; then remove it as we have said, then wet cloths in warm and cold water, and place them on the wound, and wipe with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such people who crush themselves and place on it to corrupt that moisture which remains. Then the cure until it is healthy. And if there comes an abscess hot in the wound, then treat with plaster soothing until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs are born in papers other than those that are natural and are entangled, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and cloudiness, so much so that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure it: either by cauterizing together with fire, or by applying hot medicine according to what is written above or the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person in your hand, then turn the paper from the eye with your left hand; if it is turned over, that's good; if not, then insert a needle through one thread on top; and whether it is near the edge of the paper or the hairs are born next to these hairs, and pull one thread up all along the paper, and turn it with the razor; then cut with the spatula knife below the paper, below the attached hairs, from the large lacrimal gland to the small; then remove one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth underneath the paper, then press on the paper with your finger like the mirror bellows, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift up the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is such a person who needs to cut off a large quantity of the paper according to how much the paper has softened; then cut with the spatula knife above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large lacrimal gland up to small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the heart, then remove it all; then bring together the two lips with a stitch made with a needle and one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make dry the excess threads on the two eyebrows with any sticky substance if you see fit to do so; and if not, pay no mind, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching with drying and tightening things, because the paper revives at the union of the wound and its gathering together, but stitching is mute (as the ancients said), and this is a useless work.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And there is another way to do this: you should mark the paper with a figure like the mirror bellows, as we have described, with three needles placed apart according to the shape shown below:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut those that exceed the small forces evenly according to the shape shown here."
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	"And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread near the large bell, and the second thread near the small one, and bring the two threads together evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin that you have marked, as we have explained, then sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and care for it until it is healed; and if a scab forms on your incision, smooth it with cerote and similar soothing ointment."
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	"And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are inverted: in this case you should use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial."
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	"The care of the veins is according to this shape: and it is that you invert the paper and cut into it as I have said, and then make two veins artificially, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two points of the two parts where you hold the threads; then join them together finely above the paper of the oil, and stretch the two veins from the two parts firmly; and leave it thus for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will die, shrink, and dry out until it falls off by itself."
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	"If it takes too long, cut it with more force, then care for it until it is healed; and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer point; this is the shape of the two veins that you should make according to this figure, and according to this length and width: ..."
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The procedure is as follows: take a fine needle and insert one soft and fine silk thread into it; then join the ends of the threads and tie them together finely, with the length of the threads being a palm long. Then prepare another fine silk thread briefly in the eye of the needle and tie its ends to the thread. Then have the patient put their head on your stomach, and let them be near the sun so that the procedure is clearly visible, for it is a subtle and delicate procedure. Then insert the needle into the root of the hair near the paper, and pierce it quickly until you draw it out over the natural hair. Then pull the hair up to the eye of the needle, and insert that hair if there are one or two or three or more hairs. Then pull your hand so that all the hairs come out of the eye of the needle along with the natural hair."
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	"And if the eye is pierced and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the eye down along all the thread that you have prepared, until the eye comes out of the hole above and you can see it through the vision of the eye. Then pull the eye and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long natural eyebrow hair, and lift it up with that one which you leave, so that it is separated and then lift it up."
de la porriture de l’oil	"About the rottenness of the eye"
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	"There are two ways in which the disease called 'aleacrati' or rottenness can occur in the eye:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of working this is that you cut that suture and separate the lips of it, and put linen wicks inside, and hold them there until it is healed; and indeed, it is not necessary to use things that dry and constrict in its treatment. For if you do so, the disease returns worse than before; but one works with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or bitter almonds cooked along with linseed are beneficial, and anointments of diacylglycerol melted in some oils, and a wick is wrapped around it, and this is the treatment.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you must be wary that it does not heal in its former shape, and these works that we have said are remedies against this disease, so that it may not return in its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is under the skin is truly called "axacrati," and it is both natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound or split and cauterization and things similar to this; and the manner of working in it is that you take a needle, on which there are two threads, and stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid towards the right, so that the thread comes out in two places in the flesh; then stretch the flesh upwards along the entire needle, and cut it with one scissor broad as a span.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper over, and make two splits inside the paper along its edges; and let the openings of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the figure is like the figure of a letter called "gamma" in Greek. Then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its sides are away from underneath it from what supports the paper; then join the two severed parts and sew them with a thread of wool. Then perform the cure of this that we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from split or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a full cut under the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then open between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said. And one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and skilled masters devise every means possible to make the figure return to its natural shape. And the sick person himself, according to what he needs in remedies and instruments, varies in many ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	Of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness happens to many people in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural works, it is necessary then that you put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut what is too thick with a fine scissor, which should not be too thick nor too sharp, so that the sick person cannot suffer that the scissor cut too much or scratch the eye. And let your incision, from which you peel off that which is stuck together, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape; and all that is stuck together is healed, and sometimes they make in the eye salted water, and wash it with fresh water, and with collyrium. Then put between the paper and the eye a linen bandage, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in egg yolk. And afterwards on the third day use collyrium and things that soothe until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the corner is in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles one hard pimple, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles a white moist congealed blister, such that when touched with iron and attempted to be grasped with pincers, it cannot be seized. And both of these appearances begin towards the large tear duct and gradually grow larger until they cover all of the eye's vision and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the sick person puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes; and you lift the paper with your hand, then grasp the corner with pincers of small width, and stretch it upwards. Then take a needle, and put one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and one strong thread on it; and double the point of the needle slightly and stick it into the corner, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the corner with a thread and stretch it upwards, and peel off everything along the side of the corner that faces the pupil and the skin up to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with the fine scissors and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct so that by the incision the usual course of tears is not obstructed. And sometimes they stretch the corner only with the onyx and the thread, as we have said; then they peel it off with the soft scissors according to this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch the soft flesh and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little of fine-ground barley into the eye, and make a poultice with litargite, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, this kind of nail is often cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you cover it with coppersmith, then the eye of the patient works, and take a light spatula with a little point according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And carefully lift up the nail and if you see that it does not thin and the reason presses upon it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a poultice made of litargite and red collyrium and ground barley, and stop up the eye until the next day; then resume the other operation according to this same work, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is any obstacle in the eye that opposes this operation, such as a hot aposteme, then apply cold compresses and first treat the hot aposteme until it is healed; then resume the operation as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part of it but not all, so that tears do not come into it; then apply red collyrium made of litargite.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And regarding the flesh that grows upon the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are some men in whom sometimes red flesh grows and covers the pupil and adheres to the margins of the cornea and appears like a bloodshot eye; and the operation for this is that the patient places his head in your lap, then opens his eyes, and coil all of that flesh with suitable tweezers and hold it firmly; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting until the end, but be careful not to injure the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the nail, and use small forceps such as those used for extracting a tooth, as shown in this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	"When the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply to the eye powder made from crushed silk or distill red collyrium onto it along with other corrosive medicines. Then place cotton dipped in egg white over the eye so that it is securely sealed against a hot abscess; and if anything remains and hot blood accumulates, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that cool heat. Then return to your work once it is healed, and do likewise for each piece of flesh attached to the eye by this manner."
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	"But nonetheless you must align the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course; and in case of an accident, especially with ironwork; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that these members can withstand this work."
des voines des eulz	"of the veins of the eyes"
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	"These veins are red and cover the eye, taking away from its sight and weakening it every day. Therefore, you must first examine the eye in which the sebaceous matter is present, making sure that there is no other external disease besides the sebaceous matter; then treat it in this manner: tell the patient to put their head on your lap, then carefully press these veins with all your skill, using a bandage doubled according to this shape:"
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	"And there should be two bandages placed at intervals along one course according to this shape:"
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	"Then carefully press the veins with force using these bandages and remove the blood afterwards as often as you see the veins come out from the eye; but make sure not to scratch the eye with the points of the tweezers, and perform this work at midday before the sun, being very careful in your work so that you do not squeeze anything but the veins; then distill green and red collyrium onto the eye to dissolve what remains of the sebaceous matter."
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	"And if you are unable to completely remove it in that hour, then apply a plaster made from soothing substances for the pain of the eyes onto the eye and leave it on for a few days until the pain is appeased and you are sure there is no hot abscess, then resume according to this manner before until it is healed; and here is the shape of the pressure:"
de la fistule de l’oil	"of the fistula of the eye"
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The physicians call a fistula "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and burning hot medicine according to what I have said before, but if it is not clean, then there is something inside that you should cut into, on the abscess where it should break open, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take all the instruments that are here; this is called "aspre chief" (biting head), and it should be made of hard iron with one sharp point like a file as it appears in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the instrument on the decayed bone, then turn it between your two hands and press down a little until you know that all of the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then return to the application of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound closes up and flesh appears, and the body of the bone is sound, and remains like this for forty days without any renewal or formation of an abscess, nor does bad chance occur, know that it is healed. If not, then there is no other remedy but to bring back the fistula to its original opening according to this form: namely, uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it has been uncovered take one awl like this shape, and let the iron shank have three angles, and let the wood be tapered to the tip as you see here
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the awl on the bone near the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand away from the eye about one inch, then turn the whole awl until it pierces the bone and you can feel it with your hand near your nose. Then return to the application of drying medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh appears and the wound becomes firm, then the matter will go towards the nostril; thus it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Regarding the issue from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open and there is no disturbance to the nostril or diminution of sight, then you must bind up the patient; then cleanse it and put cupping glasses on without cauterizing to suck out the humour. Then place a liniment made of aloes, acacia, incense, and storax on the eye and compress it, and cover it with bandages and cloths. The manner of applying the cloths is that you should take soft cloths and fold each one four times, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs; then bind them on firmly with a hard bandage, and recommence the cupping glasses without cauterizing to suck out the humour. Then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the liniment becomes moist, then you must change it often. Then remove the liniment after one day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that is good; but if not, then recommence the emplastering and bandages and liniment and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Regarding the bursting of a blood vessel in the eye
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rupture occurs in the tissue of the eye and opens up, and paper-like substances come forth like grains of resin, and it is frightening to see, then if you wish to heal it, do as follows: take a needle and insert it into the root of the lower part until it reaches the upper part; then take another needle with a double thread from the side of the nostril, and let it pierce through there. Then tie one end of the thread around one part of the uvea, and compress it well, then remove the needle and place linen moistened in egg yolk on the eye. Leave it until the blood coagulates with the uvea, then dress the wound with comforting substances until it is healed. And sometimes the wound is restricted by the uvea on every side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has a large opening, then pierce it with a thin spatha (needle) which comes from deep within the eye, and draw out the moist albuginous humour which descends into the eye. Then withdraw it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Regarding the bowing of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bowing of the eye which appears like water descending, and this is not water. And the manner of appearance of the operation is as follows: make the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take their head between your two hands and move it until you see the bow rising above your eyes. Then insert a needle into it and do not let it descend or be disarranged by light, and let the patient see things as they used to. And if it does not descend below, know that it is watery, and if the descent of the bow is not as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin needle and pierce it into the corneal tissue about one inch along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the cornea until the bow comes out. And when it has come out, distill hot water mixed with honey or fennel water boiled with honey into the eye, then dress it with other ointments until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Regarding the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the likenesses of needles for piercing in the division; so do according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from sunlight, and let them hold their healthy eye tightly closed; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if it is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument near the corner by the thickness of a thread at that part below the little eyelid; then gently push the instrument called "almagda" until it pierces into the eyelid and you feel it reach the empty space; and the measure of the way of almagda must be to the depth of the measure from the tip of the prune to the end of the blackness; that is the corner of the eye; then you will see the bone through the clarity of the horned paper, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the needle is, then express it through one vein after another. If the needles come out now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After resting a little while, and once the water rises through the second vein, insert the thread with the instrument; when it is well inserted and no longer rises, gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand bit by bit; then add a drop of rosewater to the eye, and wipe away any excess from around the eye. Then place a wad of cotton or linen soaked in rosewater and egg white on top of the eye, and bind it with the healthy eye. Now, we and those of our time apply common brocade with egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are certain people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make one subtle point, then insert the almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient one comfortable couch where he can sleep on his back in two dark rooms; and may he be deprived of all movements, and eat light foods, and not move his head to either side, and let him lie bound according to his position until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house, and examine his vision, and when you make him see certain things, and then bind him again up to the seventh day. And it is not necessary that you do this during the operation or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you perform it because water rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If inflammation occurs, then untie the eye before the seventh day, and apply that which allays inflammation; and when it has been alleviated, then uncover the vision and put upon his face one bandage to cover for a few days, and remain always in that dark house. And then gradually leave the house little by little, and return to his dwelling; and know that none of his disciples should interfere with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And there came to us one from the East who told us that in some lands people perform almagda piercing, from which they suck out water, but nevertheless I have never seen any of them in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be made of pure gold:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads should be of this same subtlety, and the back in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh over the nails
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No comment
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any remains that cannot be scraped off, then open it with one of the thin and light instruments so that nothing remains; and if you get tired or feel faintness or heat, then wash it cleanly with cold water, as is necessary; and if they are malignant ulcers, hurry and cauterize them until the inflammation is reduced and all the flesh has been removed, then apply honey and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nail opens and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is dead flesh in the bone above, therefore the instrument does not come to cut: then you must insert one thread of thick linen, dipped in warm water and sprinkled with a bit of salt or less on both ends; and have the patient place the threaded end into their nail with some force and draw it inward through the nose until it reaches the mouth; many times children at school do this, and it is easy for those who wish to perform it. Then hold one end of the thread that comes out of the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and gently pull each side in turn until you feel both ends with your fingers. Do this until you know that the threads have corrupted all the dead flesh, then remove the threads, wipe away the blood, dip them in Egyptian ointment, and replace them in the nail as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all remaining flesh. Then place a poultice of warm bran on it for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them. This is the form of the instrument for purging the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nail:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be made of silver or brass, like an open lamp or a tube, and the funnel should also be made like this; and if you want to, make one with a closed tube, so that the instrument is full for purging the head. And let there be many holes at the top to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Here are some ways to treat flesh growing on the nail:
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	"Frequently at the head, there occurs an illness called 'telul', which grows and becomes large enough to be seen; therefore, you must cut it off at its beginning, and remove all of its fur, then place on it a cautery or burning medicine. But if you delay cutting it until it is large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted boil. For when it is cut, great evil comes upon the patient. But if the boil is soft to the touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then the patient empties and is cut without fear, and the wound is cured with drying and constricting things."
quant li neis est copez et cosus	"When the boil is cut and closed"
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Know that when suppuration comes to one of these affected cartilage, it profits little for some people. Therefore, when this happens to anyone, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together in a stitch, then heal it until it is healthy. But if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must scrape away all the parts of their core until they are clean, then bring the two lips together in a stitch, tighten them, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and crushed incense; place over the powders a piece of strong or other adhesive plaster, and let it heal by itself, then heal with ointment until it is healthy."
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	"The method of stitching is as follows: either by needles, as we have said in the case of abdominal suturing; or by thread, as I have shown you."
des apostemes des levres	"boils on the lips"
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men suffer within the lips an abscess hard as grains of wheat, some smaller and others larger; therefore, you must turn back the lips, cut on each knot, grasp it with forceps and cut in every part. Then apply powdered vitriol to the wound after incision until the blood is staunched; then apply a poultice, and dress the place with dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there arises on the gums attached flesh which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, and let flow the bow or blood. Then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the wound; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: for it will not return after the cautery. These are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are gathered together at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scales which are ugly and harsh. And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and worms so that corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink. Therefore you must make the sick person sit between your hands, with their chin in your lap, and raise the teeth where the scales appear until there is nothing left; and thus do for the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other stains, until they are clean; and if you remove what is at the first cause, it is good. If not, then begin again on the second day and the third until you have everything cleaned out. Know that teeth require various forms of instruments to clean according to what the work shows, for the instruments used to clean between teeth have different shapes than those used to clean around them; and these shapes and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating a toothache, you must delay extraction as long as possible, for it is not right to do otherwise; for this is a very high substance until one has no excuse for extracting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore when the sick person is determined to have a tooth extracted, you must be certain of the aching tooth. Many times the pain leaves the sick person and they believe it to be in a healthy tooth, and have the good tooth extracted; but nevertheless the pain does not depart thereby, for we have already seen this happen too often. And when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then you must scratch around the tooth on all sides with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all parts. Then move it with your two fingers or with fine forceps little by little until it is well loosened, and firmly hold it with the forceps; and let the chin of the sick person rest in your lap between your knees, and hold it still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Afterward extract the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently on each side and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and infected, then you must fill the hole with wads of cloth where the piercing is; and carefully grasp it with forceps so that it does not break while extracting; and it is very important to work skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take good care that you do not break it, and if a part remains, it will cause the sick person greater pains from the evil of the root. And beware that you do not act like ignorant barbers who through their haste and boldness often break the jawbone, and do not accomplish what we have described; but sometimes they bring on great illness through neglecting this matter, either by leaving some roots behind or by breaking the jawbone, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or water and salt; and if there are flowings of blood which often happen, then fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments with which one first moves the teeth should be long-pointed and thick-handled, so that they do not bend when extracting a tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so that they do not bend at all during traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed for holding movement.
de la racine des dens	Of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains at traction, then you must place on the empty socket moistened cotton with butter for one or two days until the socket is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", which resembles a bird's beak in appearance; and let them be made inside like a file, this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called 'althali', that is, the crowbar, of which this is the shape:"
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	"And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out because of this, that is good. If not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come hereafter:"
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if one uses this tool that has two handles, of which this is the shape:"
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	"and other iron tools that are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this tool that resembles large pliers, of which this is the shape:"
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	"And let these tools be strong so that they cannot break, and know that there are many dental tools; and also other tools, which are not counted. And the wise master finds his own tool according to what his work and illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancient did not teach any tool due to the diversity of them. And if one breaks the cartilage or other bones where it could fit, then look for the tools that you need, which I have told you about, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the shape:"
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	"And let them be thick and hold well to hold the bone so that it does not slip away but can hold and remove it; and then restore it with appropriate medicine for that place. And if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then scrape it out with all these tools:"
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	"When teeth appear not according to their natural position, and the shape is unsightly, especially in young girls, then you must know if the tooth is close behind the tooth, and not in its proper place, and it cannot be seen or filed. Then scrape it away. And if it is aired with the tooth, then take this tool of which this is the shape, resembling a small beak, made of iron sharpened at the end:"
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	"And tap the tooth lightly every day for several days to soften it and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent enough to be filed, then file it with such a file as this one has here its shape:"
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	"And it is also like the file used to make needles. And file the tooth lightly every day with this file so that it does not move too much until it falls out. Then plane the end with any smoother, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file down its sharpness enough so that it no longer cuts the tongue nor impairs speech."
quant li dent lochent	"When teeth lock"
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When teeth are misaligned,
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	"And when teeth fall out, if one replaces them in their place, gradually as we have said; and let not the foolish and impatient meddle with it. And sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and put it in the place where there is a gap, and hold it thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time."
de coper lou liien de la lengue	"To cure the tie of the tongue"
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	"Sometimes this tie occurs naturally beneath the tongue at birth; or as an accident from a healed wound. The procedure is as follows: you open the mouth of the patient and tilt their head back towards your chest, then raise the tongue. Next, cut the nerve tie from the side until the tongue is freed from its attachment. If there is any scarring or hardness due to a wound, use the tip of an instrument to cut away that portion on the side. Be careful not to cut too deeply so as not to harm the artery beneath it. Once you have finished, rinse the wound with rose water and sage, or cold water, then place a linen cloth underneath the tongue each night so that the wound cannot close until healed. If bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the area; if the bleeding continues, cauterize it using a lentiginous cautery iron, which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with another cure until it is completely healed."
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you see it as of a livid or black color or hard and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre. And if it tends towards blenching and there is moisture present, use an onion and a sharp, fine spatula to scratch it open on both sides; and if bleeding occurs from your procedure, apply powdered vitriol until it stops flowing, then return to your procedure until all the furuncle is treated. Then rinse with sage and celandine, and treat it with other remedies until it is completely healed."
des apostemes de la gorge	Here is a translation of the text you provided about swollen glands in the neck:
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	"Sometimes boils called 'godath', properly called the two amygdalae, come into the throat. If you treat them as we have said in the division, but they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small extent and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either, especially for the flow of blood; but let it ripen, and then you will cut it open where it would break by itself; and if it is of pale color round, and the root is subtle, have ready the instrument to cauterize, but first make sure that the abscess lies calmly and is quiet. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with their head in your lap, and they open their mouth and take the servant between their hands, and press the tongue under the whole instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be made of silver or subtle brass like a knife:"
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	"And when you press the tongue with the whole instrument and see the abscess, then take the awl and drive it into the amygdala. Then twist it upward as far as you can; wipe some lint with it, then cauterize with the instrument, which is shaped like a pair of tongs; but the ends are curved inward toward each other and very sharp. It is made of iron or bronze:"
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	"And if you do not have this instrument at hand, cut it with pincers, which are shaped thus:"
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	"And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other. And when you have cut one of the amygdalae, cut the other in the same manner, then after the incision, let the patient gargle with hot water and salt water, and if there is bleeding, let the patient gargle with water or decoctions of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the blood is stanched. Then treat it until it is healed. And sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two amygdalae, so cut them in the same way as the two amygdalae."
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	"And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, namely one of small extent. It had closed almost all the throat so tightly that the woman could hardly breathe because the airway was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for one or two days. The abscess was already so large that it had filled up two fingers in length inside her throat. So I hurried quickly, and inserted an awl into one of them, then twisted it upwards and drew out a great deal of pus; then I did the same on the other side of her throat, opened her mouth and pressed her tongue downwards. Then I inserted the awl into these abscesses and cut off part of them, but only a little blood came out. And so the airway in the woman's throat was opened, and she began to drink water and then wine. But I continued cutting away at this abscess for a long time; it kept growing back and filling up again with whatever I had cut away until it became very large. Then I incised it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it remained without growing further. And I left these parts, and do not know what God did with her afterwards."
de l’uve	"de l'uve"
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	**When the humors descend to the eye, and it is inflamed and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";**
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And at the head there should be a hair, on which one puts the medicine, like the horse's tail of a spoonful, and places the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus run from their mouth away from the medicine towards it, so that it does not reach the throat or the belly. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for about half an hour until you see it blackened and the biting of the medicine is calmed; and if you see fit, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton in the cannus above until the cotton reaches the eye. And do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and falls off after four or five days. And if you need to restart the cautery of the medicine, then restart it, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in warm oil, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and gargle until healed."
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	"This cure is safer than the incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and combine them all or some of them in one pot, and put it on the fire to boil. And let the pot be well sealed with clay, and inside the pot there should be an instrument shaped like this:"
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	"And it should be made of silver or brass, and one of the ends of the instruments should be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cannus until the eye is mortified. Then restart often until the eye dries out. And make sure not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot aposteme, because many things can happen; and do not do it except when the aposteme is declining in heat. And if this instrument is not present, then take a cannus and put an egg shell on top so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the egg shell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is good treatment together with health."
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	"Many times a bone from the throat or spine of a fish, or any other thing, gets stuck in the throat; therefore you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you see it move. And what you cannot see and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of flax, or a root of lettuce, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will be seen, and then pull it out. And if it does not come out from what we have said, then take an instrument of lead made in this shape:"
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	"And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high. And make sure not to touch the epiglottis, lest the whole thing come loose, nor push the bone in; but rather let the patient put in the instrument themselves, for they will know where the thing is stuck. Then draw it out straight along the entire length of the instrument until it comes out completely."
de la sansue de la gorge	Here's a possible translation for "de la sansue de la gorge":
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	**Original Text:**
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	"And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye. Do this many times, for it will surely fall out. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take one pot which has live coals inside, and its opening should be covered by a cloth pierced in the middle, and into that hole place the head of the instrument; then add your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth and closes their mouth tightly so no smoke escapes but reaches deep within; and the stone will now fall out, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient feel thirsty, and eat salty foods and herbs, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to pass out through this treatment."
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	"And the shape of the instrument with which to treat the stone is like this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps used for entering the throat; it should resemble the bill of a goose and have sharpness like that of a lime so that what it grasps, it cannot let go. See here its form:"
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter on Abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	"There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what is remembered here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two ways in which some are similar in appearance but differ in what they contain. And the second manner is for those that are on the body, for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of a fatty location are different from those that appear at joints, and each has its own judgment in this work."
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	"And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until they have fully ripened and burst on their own. And there are those that must be pierced when they are hard, even if they do not fully ripen, such as abscesses near joints. For when an abscess appears near a joint, if it is left alone until it is completely surrounded by inflammation, the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become corrupted, which can cause contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the main limb, waiting too long to perform the incision will harm the main limb. But if the abscess is near the fundament, it should be incised before it bursts; and one should not incise a hard abscess without proper digestion being completed, except for those near the fundament that might otherwise become deeply embedded and form a fistula, which could take a long time to heal."
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	"And you should know the time for performing an incision on an abscess that has fully ripened and burst: it is when pain eases, fever subsides, inflammation and redness diminish, and when the apex of the abscess becomes soft and pointed; and other signs. And it is necessary to perform the incision where the abscess hangs down most, or where it opens most; and the incision should be long, along the length of the body. If the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all smooth places without wrinkles."
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	"And in those that are folded, according to the shape of that limb. And when an abscess is in fatty tissue, it is better to wait until it has completed its digestion before performing the incision, as we have said. For if you incise it beforehand, the body of the pus will be spilled out and full of much filth; and the edges and depth may become hardened. And there are some abscesses that should be incised according to the width of the body, depending on what the limb requires. And small abscesses require small incisions, while large ones require large incisions and many slits according to the size of the abscess. And there are some abscesses where you should press down with your hand and cover them when they have become as large as a fist and softened, like how one treats boils: And there are those that are split into three angles, and others that resemble the leaf of a myrtle, like armpit abscesses; and there are some where you make a round incision, and other incisions with similar cuts."
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those without a head, such as superficial soft abscesses, should be incised flatly. When the abscess is large and has swollen greatly, and you perform the incision, do not evacuate all the pus at once, but only part of it; then seal the abscess until the following day, then evacuate some more; repeat this process gradually several times until all the pus is expelled, especially if the patient is weak or a woman in childbirth, or young children, or elderly debilitated men. For sometimes the heart may suddenly stop beating with the expulsion of the pus, and perhaps the patient will die, and you would not be aware of it. Therefore, proceed with great caution, and after incising your abscess, examine the wound to see if the opening is small; if it is a clean incision, then apply linen or old cotton dressings; but if it is a large abscess with many slits, you should place a dressing in each one so that they come together. And if you have excised a piece of skin from the abscess and sewn it back down, you must fill it with dry lint or linen cloth without moisture, and leave it until the third day; then remove it and treat with ointment until healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs from your incision, apply cold water and a cloth moistened with water to the area many times. And if the bleeding persists, provide care and treatment according to what is written in this book regarding powders for such cases, especially during wintertime when the limb where the abscess is located is very nervous; you should place moistened dressings and cloths warmed in wine and oil on top until the third day. But if it occurs during summer and the area is fleshy, then apply moistened dressings made of water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for three days as mentioned earlier; then remove the dressing, cleanse the wound, and treat it according to what is necessary until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	"And this one should universally know in the treatment of abscesses": I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is that chapter.
des soros	Here are some key points about boils (soros):
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where kernels of the head come small abscesses,
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	"And the cutting into an abscess that is pierced and moist is easier, for they are of little blood. And there are some of these abscesses at the head where there is no moisture, and such as I counted on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it with a knife, it would have made a wound like from a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, except those which come at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that the bowels may exit; and they cure as it is necessary."
des scrophules	"of scrofulas"
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	"Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and below the buttocks, and in the armpits, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, and they are interconnected with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its own skin, like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also those that are malignant and do not want to submit to treatment. Therefore, in one that you see has good disposition for touching, and is like the color of the skin, and moves from each side and is not hard near the nerves of the neck or the artery or the channel, and is not deep; then it should be cut through above, and scraped on both sides, and if there are any two lips of the heart at the corners, you can use them as we have said in abscesses of the head. And treat little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and the knife should not slip from your hand, nor dig too deep, so that you do not cut what you should not."
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	"And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not let you work, then put ground vitriol or some powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down and the wound begins to rot. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your task until you complete it; then examine with your little finger if there are any small scrofulas remaining, cut them out and clean them up. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it should not be cut in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall by itself without harm; then fill the wound with cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it."
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you cut the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, provided that there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must proceed to cut the root of it and draw out matter, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain superfluity should be opened where it appears most swollen; and open it in the same way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then bring tents with ointment and similar things so that it rots what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment for a long time until it is healed."
de squinance	de squinance could refer to "squinance" in Old French, which means "a kind of skin disease, scrofula".
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	"This is what the ancients said and spoke about the incision of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words."
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have strangulation, the epiglottis, which is called "epiglotte", must be avoided; and do not attempt aid through this method, for all the veins and the membrane of the patient are hot in the mouth or throat or in both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small slit across between two circles or according to the quantity of the slit of the soft palate, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Moreover, this area is so close to the epiglottis that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long and thin.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the chin, then cut into the flesh until it reaches the bone; avoid the blood vessels if you see any, and then cut the soft palate as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	This is demonstrated by the cut in the bone of the chin that jumps forward if it has been broken, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a time
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the critical hour has passed during which strangulation might occur, then bring together the two lips of the wound in the flesh and stitch it up without including the cartilage; afterward administer medicines that promote healing until it is whole again.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that this procedure should not be done unless the patient's throat is completely blocked and they are judged to be near death, otherwise there will be damage.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, cut the epiglottis for those patients who cannot breathe through their mouth and are breathing through the wound in order to prevent death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	Therefore, the ancients advised leaving the wound open until the worst of the illness has passed, which usually takes three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded that the wound be stitched up and dressed until it was healed
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young woman take a knife and stab it into her throat, cutting some of the arteries in her neck
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to treat her, but found her already dead
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I examined the wound and saw that blood had come out of it, and I knew that she had not cut her veins or arteries except for those in her throat, from which the windpipe was protruding through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried to stitch up the wound and dress it until it healed
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and after that, the young woman was hoarse for some time but eventually recovered her voice
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore, I say that in cutting the epiglottis there should be no fear
de la grosse gorge	of a large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This type of hernia is called "pharyngeal hernia" and appears as a large, dark purple swelling that mainly affects women
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and there are two types of these hernias: natural and acquired. The natural type does not have an opening
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the acquired type can manifest in two ways: one resembling fatty tissue and the other resembling a hernia that comes from an arterial source
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and one should not be afraid to operate on this condition, especially when it is small. One should prove and search for it throughout the entire throat area
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it resembling a fatty lump and not connected to any vein, cut it like you would a fatty tumor, and remove all of it if possible
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search carefully around the entire area and dress it properly until it is perfectly healed
des nous	fatty tumors
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many types of fatty tumors, which I will describe in detail__
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now I must tell all the difference that is between dislocation and injury
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the ebullition has passed, and corruption is completed; then fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With dislocation there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a synapse which is its own sack and is the same color as the body's skin, and begins like a joint and becomes swollen
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are of two similar kinds, either dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat dislocation, first examine and inquire about all the instruments called "intromittent" according to how their forms come in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of examining dislocation is that you take the softest part you find in it and twist your fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then proceed according to the size of the dislocation
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the intromittent and beware lest anything spring forth
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moist corruption runs, what ever its color may be, then cut it as I have said for other dislocations
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the intromittent no moisture comes, know that it is dry, then cut it crosswise and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each side of it and watch the skin where it lies so you can draw it out whole with the dislocation
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces until nothing remains
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the dislocation will return many times
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a bit remains and your skin grieves you, then apply to the wound some sharp waters or powders, and strain the wound, and place on it things that soothe inflammation and hot dislocations, and treat with other treatments until it is whole
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the dislocation is large, then cut the two lips of the wound and treat those that enter into flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beating is against you or another thing hastens itself and applies the powder of ground vitriol to the place, let it lie for two or three days until the wound purges itself and rests from ebullition of blood; then return to cut out what remains of the dislocation.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the shapes of the intromittent instruments, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are four square ones called "albarets," and one called "breb." There are also three kinds to encircle fistulas:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	"And likewise like needles used to stitch wounds, they are made of yellow brass or iron, or silver. Those that are gold-colored are considered more valuable, and black lead is preferred for encircling fistulas."
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	"And they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the hole's diameter."
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	"The shapes of onchines are mostly similar to what you see here: large, medium, and small; there are also onchines with two curves in three different sizes."
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	"And there are onchines with three curves and they also come in three sizes; likewise those with two curves and those with only one curve, all of which are necessary for their purpose."
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	"The tips of these are cutting and there are some that cut only from one side, used for scraping bones without damaging the vein or nerve."
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	"And among these instruments are alemelles that fit into the hand so that the patient does not feel them when opening boils."
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	"And they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you see."
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	"And one only uses them with caution, such as on legs, arms, breasts, armpits, and similar locations."
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	"And sometimes another small instrument resembling a file is used, shaped like this, with which one squeezes out blood:"
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is sometimes placed at the site where there is danger of cutting veins or arteries, and some are made in this large size:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	"Sometimes men's breasts swell up when they begin to be corrupted, so that they appear like those of a woman."
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	"and remain ugly and swollen; whoever wants to cure them must follow this form from line B to G:"
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	"then scrape away the fat, dress the wound with healing ointment and join the two lips of the wound together to suture them, and cure it until it is healed."
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	"If the breast hangs down and is soft due to its size, like those of women, then one makes two incisions above it, resembling two creases:"
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	"So that one incision is contiguous with the other at their ends, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line B to G:"
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"Then scrape off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever else is necessary for the cure until it is healed."
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	"And if it is not healing, or the incision is not complete because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment."
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	"And leave it until it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then cure it until it is healed."
des apostemes des asselles	"Boils in the armpits"
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"These boils that appear under the arms are hard, with knots, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	"Therefore those that contain moisture must be incised according to this form, from line B to G:"
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when all the matter inside the boil has been emptied out, then fill the wound with cotton wool and leave it until the following day, then remove all the cotton wool and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	"If the boil resembles a scrofula, then incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound discharges matter, then apply a cautery as we have said before."
de la routure de l’artere	"Surgical procedure for arterial bleeding"
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	"When an artery is cut and the skin above it is burnt shut, boils often form, and the same happens with an enlarged vein that becomes inflamed."
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	"And if one recognizes this when it occurs due to an artery, then the boil will be long and deep:"
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	"And when you feel it with your fingers, there is one pulsation felt; but when it occurs due to a vein, no external pulse can be felt."
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	"And it is foolish to cut this boil, especially when it appears under the arms or armpits, around the angles of the jaw, around the neck, and in many other locations where it is very large."
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	"It is therefore necessary to avoid cauterization with iron, and one should also avoid it if the patient is feverish. In case of arterial inflammation, make an incision through the skin along its length:"
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	"then open the wound and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed:"
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	"then insert a needle underneath one side of the artery and push it through to the other side, then tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places according to what I have taught you regarding the extraction of the two temporal arteries:"
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	"then insert a probe between the two ligatures to locate the bleeding point and remove any remaining blood from the boil."
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	"then dress it with healing ointment until all matter has discharged, then remove the ligature:"
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"then dress it with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	"If the boil occurs due to an incision of the vein, then you must remove all the affected skin around the boil using your hand:"
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	"then insert a needle underneath the area you are holding with your hand and push it through to the other side, using a doubled thread to pull it out:"
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	"then ligate the boil as I have taught you, tying one end of the thread to each side of the boil:"
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	"And if you suspect that the thread might break, then insert another needle through all the boil along the same incision as the first needle, and tie the threads in four places:"
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	"then cut off the boil until no more matter comes out, then cut away the remaining dead flesh and leave what has been ligated in place:"
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	"then place a cloth moistened with wine and oil over it, then apply dressings and ointments as needed until it is healed."
des apostemes des ners	"Boils on the nerves"
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	"So boils can also occur on nerves when they are struck or from too much physical exertion and similar causes."
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	"And this happens most often at the shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints, and it is one kind of abscess; its color seems like the color of the body, and it appears in many conditions without pain."
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	"And when pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, but it is not deep inside the body, but beneath the heart;"
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And remains unmoved on all sides,
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	"And those who are at the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel."
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, use forceps to grasp it and cut off its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is large, suspend it with tweezers and scrape it off, then clean it and stitch up the wound. Take care of it until it heals completely.
des grosses boces pendans	"hanging pouches"
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, except there. It is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to it. Its roots are thin and its stool is large; some are small and others very large.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw one man who had two on his belly that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a fine root, and were slightly split open, and moisture flowed from them continually.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found that one was eighteen ounces heavy, and the other six, and the result of the incision is such that you can see if the patient is moist; the color of the cartilage is white and moist with a fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the cut is wide, and you are present, have the cautery ready for use. For when cutting, there often comes too much blood flow, and if the blood gushes forth, then hasten to apply the cauterizer.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	"And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take one well-made thread of tow, and tie the joint as we have said, leaving it for two days."
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	"Then press it, and do not stop pulling the thread of tow until it covers the joint completely, and cut through it without effort. And if the roots are large, then there is fear in cutting itself for the belly, but you can safely cut halfway."
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	"Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not cut the tendon which is of dark color and poor sensation and produces milk."
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enchanted aposteme, and I will come to the cure of cancer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil has burst
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of wound or split of anus, and is on the belly and in some cases of the buttocks, as it happens with other fistulas, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from vents;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is by the fistula of the anus and the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the aposteme appears like the color of flesh, and is light without pain, and opens with various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the outlet of the intestines, then it is more diverse. And when you press it with your fingers, it rises up and then returns. And sometimes it is seized, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the anus and by violent effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is for moisture, it is easy and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining. And if it is for blood, then the aposteme appears large and hard, fixed according to quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for vents, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance shows whether it is for arterial blood, venous blood, or vents.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Then you must leave it alone. For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter on apostumes, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or bowel, then you must command the patient to tie his linen girdle and stretch out all his body lengthwise, then press from without around the boil.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	Then place him on his side between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the place you have marked with all the spatula.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then press on half of the boil above with great pressure;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie it tightly around with a strong thread or silk cord, and let the joint rest completely still.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open half of the boil and stretch it over the joint, then insert your index finger to find the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it trapped by the joint, untangle it and insert the intestine back into the abdomen
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the boil, take it with tweezers, and cut away any excess
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if an artery or vein is against you, carefully go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with two strong threads, and sew the wound crosswise where you pierced it
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then squeeze the boil in four places above the needles, and if you see fit, remove the needles and leave it alone until it heals on its own, and cut away any dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you can cut it when it becomes subtle and ready, then treat it as necessary, and remove the boil as we have said
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And drain any blood or fluid you find, then dress the wound as needed, and sew it shut.
dou chancre	chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the appearances of a chancre and how one should operate with medicines, and how to avoid surgical cure. And we speak of an enlarging chancre in the marrow, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when chancres are in a place where they can be scraped away like those on the breast or hip, and similar places, one should remove it all at the beginning; but when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never seen any healed nor has anyone before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operation, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the sick person with black colic several times; then make him sweat if there is visible swelling; then prepare the sick person one good day for the operation. Then grasp your tweezers or scalpel and cut around the chancre on all sides, and remove it completely without leaving any behind. And let the blood flow freely, then squeeze the wound with your hand or some other thing, and if bleeding from the incision of an artery or vein opposes you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other dressings until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already spoken in the division about the appearances of dropsy, how the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment done with medicines and that done with iron: only "eclites" is mentioned here; and one should not touch it with iron in these two appearances: namely tympanites and hydropsarcina, for they are deadly things. Therefore, when you treat this dropsy appearance called "eclites" with medicines and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as asthma or diarrhea and similar things; do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt. And if you see that the patient is strong and has no other illness but dropsy alone, and is not too young nor too old, then you should operate thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Take the patient and place them upright in your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen pushing the water to the lowest part of the chest. Then take the spatula-shaped trocar according to this shape: Let it be cutting on both sides with a point, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cause bleeding;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	"Then examine if dropsy has entered the intestines: if so, you must cut three fingers' width directly below and above the navel; and if dropsy is due to liver disease, make the incision three fingers to the left of the navel; and if it's from mucus, make it on the right side, ensuring that the patient does not lie on the incision so excess fluids do not flow into this weak area."
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	"Then pierce the skin with the instrument and insert it, lifting your hand through the skin to the sinew between the skin and muscle as in flaying, about the width of a nail or some distance around. Then pierce the muscle until the sinew reaches the empty space, which is the location of the water. Then remove the instrument, which has this form: It resembles a slender silver tube, made of brass or light aluminum, with one small hole at its base and three holes on one side and two on another side. Its edges are cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that writers use to cut feathers."
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	"At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it falls into the alembic. Then empty out about half or a third of it, for if you empty too much at that moment, the patient might die from the release of their spirit due to the weapon, they may faint, or they may approach death."
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	"But empty according to the amount of his strength and according to what the disposition of the patient's strength indicates about their pulse. Then remove the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the heart closing the hole that was made in the muscle earlier. Then begin again with the instrument on another day if you see the patient enduring it, and draw out a small amount of water."
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	"Do this on several days, but be careful not to draw out too much water at once. And if you suspect the patient of having an excess of humors, leave some water behind and have them undergo a hot bath or sweat treatment in a warm room with plenty of sun exposure. Then treat them with drying medications until they are healthy again, and cauterize their stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water, as I have said before."
de l’estopement de la verge	"Regarding the obstruction of the instrument"
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	"No child is born without a hole in the penis, or if there is one it is small or not in its proper place. If this happens, it must be pierced with a very fine spatula according to this method: Then place a thin, delicate plug of lead in the hole and tie it securely for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug and allow him to do so, then replace it afterwards. But sometimes there is no need for this, as urine that comes forth does not leave it closed."
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	"Those whose hole is small are treated with a lead plug, as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the hole in its proper place are cursed, for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; nor can they enter due to the fact that matter cannot reach the mouth of the womb, and this is a serious condition."
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the manner of performing this operation is that the patient lies on their back, then extend the tip of the penis and cut it like the tail of a feather so that the hole falls in the middle as it should. And be careful not to cause bleeding, which happens frequently, and if it does happen, stop the bleeding with whatever stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed."
des pustules de la verge	"Regarding the pustules of the penis:"
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Many times these swellings appear on the penis, which is an ugly appearance of flesh. There are some that are malignant and others that are not. You must take them with a sharp needle and cut them out and clean them all, then place moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment on them; then treat them with diafinicon ointment until they are healed."
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the swelling is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, you must cauterize it. When you have cut it out, and if the swelling is at the tip of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part is outside, you must remove the part that is inside first; and when it is solid, then treat what is outside. For if you treat them together, the opening of the penis may not be secure, and blackness and corruption will come into its interior and the coition, so you must cut out everything that is black and corrupt, then tie on the plaster made of honey and flour mixed with the rind of pomegranates and figs; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	"And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this method: The cautery helps with two conditions at once: namely, bleeding and corruption. And if the opening of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead tube into the urethra and have the patient urinate through it; and when the skin at the tip of the penis that needs to be circumcised, or it happens due to wound or aposteme, then you must burn it with a sharp instrument until the ligaments are released, and deliver the opening of the penis from all sides;"
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	"And if it is difficult to separate these things, you must burn it with a fine spatula at the junction of the penis and skin; then gently dissect between them, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not adhere again."
de la circoncision	"Regarding circumcision:"
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	"Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation by choice and especially on children, it is necessary that we do our best to make it the best and easiest operation for healing."
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	"I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience."
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	"For I have wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who perform circumcision to use a single clasp, and forceps, and a novacula; thus it was easy for the heart because there are two layers, and sometimes one cuts the top one and leaves the bottom one."
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	"Or the circumcision is double pain, and at the cleansing of the glans the point of the member is not secure; and in the cleansing of the foreskin sometimes the iron slips away and mars the work, and many times it happens that they do not need cleansing and I have seen this."
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	"Regarding the cleansing that is done with forceps along the entire length of the thread, I have found through experience that it is good because forceps cut equally well above and below."
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	"For when you press your hand, you cut evenly in one single stretch of time; but the thread must be wrapped tightly around the skin; and the manner of performing the first operation is to make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying a thread around his penis, and then reassure him in every way you can;"
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	"Then make him stand upright between your hands, and hold the weights either under your feet so the child does not see them or any instruments. Then place your hand on the shaft and blow near the heart, and pull it upwards until the head of the shaft is inside. Then clean it well from the filth that has gathered there. Then tie the original position with a double thread, then tie it below one knot to another; hold it at two fingers by the second knot between the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two knots, then quickly lift up the heart and pull out the head of the shaft."
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Then let the blood flow freely until it flows no more; this is the mother's part. Then sprinkle powder on top of it and cover it with a cloth soaked in a mixture of cooked egg white untempered with rosewater, confected with good fresh rose oil. Leave it on overnight and clean it again until it is completely healed."
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	"The shape of the weights for purification should be this: the two heads should be thin and sharp; they should also be as large as a hazelnut each."
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	"The error of purification is when the heart within slips during incision; therefore, you must extend it with your finger before the wound becomes inflamed; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use tongs to do so."
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	"And if it takes three days and what is under the shaft is swollen, then leave it until the inflammation has subsided, and lightly scrape away the scab; cut as much as you can move without hurting yourself, but be careful not to damage the part of the shaft, for it will not harm him at all."
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"So treat the wound with healing powder as we have said when speaking of powders. If you cut too much and it goes upwards, it will not harm him. Treat it as we have said until it is completely healed."
dou retenement de l’urine	"On the retention of urine"
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is caused by obstruction from stone, or coagulated blood, or bowel, or flesh born, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	If the urine is not released and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in or near the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on their knees. They should place their feet on their back and extend their belly from the part above the back. The patient should strain as much as they can; this will force the neck of the bladder to open upwards so that the urine can be released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	"And if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using all the instruments called 'syringes,' of which this is the form: let it be made of fine, light silver like a bird's feather; and let its tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the tip."
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	"And the manner of issuing urine is this: you take one doubled thread, and tie at its head a small bag of wool or cotton, and put the thread's head inside the syringe; and cut off any excess of the wool and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter mixed with egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise his bladder and penis with warm olive oil and cold water."
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	"Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the belly; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it touch his empty vessel. And if this is not done according to this order, it is because the tube through which it goes is twisted. Then pull on the thread with all the wool bag, and let the urine follow the wool, then remove it, and let the urine flow."
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	"And continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient be eased."
des maladies de la vessie	Here are some examples of what "des maladies de la vessie" might mean in English:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the skin is peeled off and blood flows into the bladder, or putrefaction has gathered there, and you see that water and medications are being distilled from it, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The high places are so that the medication can fit tightly around the penis without additional help, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	"When you see your medicines thrown into the bladder, place the tip of the cautery in the moisture, and draw out what is inside. So drawing out the moisture with the cautery, then forcefully push back the cautery in; thus will the moisture enter in, and reach the bladder now, so that the patient feels it."
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	"This is the form of the thin enema used to perform an enema on the bladder: thus it is here:"
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	"And it is made of silver or brass, and the tube is higher up; below, there is one sieve or linen filter; then take a sheep's bladder and put into it the moisture you want to use for the enema on the bladder, then tie it between the two sieves with a good doubled thread, and heat this moisture in a pot over the fire. Then insert the tip of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has reached it, so that the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder."
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	"And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly all around. Then insert a strong thread into these holes, then join the circle like joining a bell, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument. And do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
de la piere	"de la pierre"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	"We have already said in the section on stones and their extraction together with medicines; and we have explained the difference between stones engrained in the kidneys and all the signs, and in which stones one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder and in the penis; and I will tell you this clearly and briefly."
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	"I say that stones engrained in the bladder happen more often to children, and this is a sign that water flows from the bladder like water in its subtlety. And they perceive sand there, and the patient grasps his penis, and he feels many times, and then it hardens; and many times these are the foundation of pain. And the cure for children is easy until they are four years old, and it is very difficult for the elderly, and it is average for young people, those who are between youth and old age. And the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones."
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	"And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to remove all the feces that are in the intestines. For sometimes they hinder searching for the stone."
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	"Then take the patient by the feet and lay him down and move him below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above. Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then seek and touch it inside."
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	"If you feel the stone in its space, then hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall out when touched all around, then moisten your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is a mature young person; and insert it into the bottom of the bladder and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder. Then press on your finger, and push the stone out there where you want to cut."
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	"And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch his right hand up towards the scrotum, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the scrotum in the part where the incision is made. Then insert the spatula shaped like this:"
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	"And cut between what is between the scrotum and the buttocks, not in the middle but on the left side of the groin. And let it be right over the stone, and your two fingers should always be at the bottom, and the incision should be made across so that it is wide from before and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large."
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	"Sometimes the pressure from your two fingers at the bottom causes the stone to come out without labor. Know that there are stones that have angles and edges: these are difficult to remove. And there are some that are smooth like a glass bead, round, whose exit is easy."
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	"Therefore, for those that have angles and edges, make the incision larger. And if it does not come out, then you must remove it with forceps which are also like a chisel at the end to grasp and remove the stone so that it does not escape. Or insert a thin curved instrument under it. And if you cannot grasp it this way, then widen one hole and if the sinew tears, then stitch it with pitch."
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	"And if there are more than one stone, then first bring out the largest one to the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull it out, and afterwards remove the smaller ones if there are any. And if they are very large, then it must be, and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes constantly from where the wound cannot be closed. But nevertheless, try to remove it, or crush it with forceps, as much as you can until you remove it in pieces."
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	"And when you have finished your work, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and stitch it up, and put on top a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the hot inflammation. Then bind the patient around his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day."
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when you untie it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then dress it with diapheconointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed."
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	"And if hot inflamed wounds and corrosions come in the wound, and congealed blood is retained in the bladder, which is known by this manner that it does not come out with urine: then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and harm it."
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	"Then wash the wound with water and honey and salt, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healed. And it is necessary that every time you dress his wounds, you tie his two thighs together and gather the medications on the area."
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	"And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra stuck inside, and urine cannot come out: then treat him as I said earlier, that you cut him many times, or excuse him from the incision with this treatment. I have already proven this."
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	"Take one iron rod according to this shape and let it be forked at three ends stuck into one stick:"
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	"Then take one thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder. Then insert the iron rod into the urethra gently until it reaches the stone. Then turn the rod in your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side. Then urine will come out quickly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the urethra. Soon it will be broken and come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed."
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"and if you cannot do this because of some obstacle, then tie one string under the stone and another above, then insert the rod against the stone between the two strings, then extract it forcefully, and untie the string, and cleanse the wound from any congealed blood that is in it; and treat it until it heals."
de la piere des femmes	"from the stone of women"
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	"It happens rarely that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who reveals herself to doctors, especially when she is chaste."
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	"And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, for which reason one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved."
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	"And if it becomes necessary for you to do so, then you must take a woman who is very skilled, and if you cannot find one, then seek out a chaste, subtle male doctor, and present him with a wise woman experienced in the lives of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to perform whatever you command regarding the examination of the stone."
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	"and carefully examine if the woman is virgin: then you must place your thumb on her fundament and search for the stone; and if you find it, then press it down with your thumb, and command her to insert her thumb into her vagina, and she should squeeze and press her left hand strongly against her bladder."
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	"If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut against the stone at the root of the thigh near the middle of the vagina, where it is more accessible to be felt; and do not move your thumb above or below the stone, and let the first incision be small."
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	"then insert the blade into the incision, if you feel that the stone is close enough to the wound so that it can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely small ones and large ones, sharp and smooth ones, long ones and round ones, and those with tails. Know their shapes in order to recognize them."
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	"And if the wound bleeds too much, then place powdered vitriol on it, and let it stay there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your task until the stone is out, and have ready the instruments that I mentioned earlier in removing stones from men, so that they may help you with your work."
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	"And if the wound bleeds too much and it is from the artery that was cut, then place powder on the wound and bind it tightly with bandages, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone where it is without trying to remove it, because by chance the patient might die. Then dress the wound."
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	"And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wound is healed, then return to your task until the stone is out."
de hernie carnouse	"Of hernia of flesh"
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	"Pus ouse n'est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l'uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l'uef, si c'on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c'est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nous avons dit; et ceu n'avient se poc non."
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	"And the generation of this hernia is from weakness that comes to the intestines, and this matter is spread out."
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	"And sometimes it comes from blows to the intestines, and this moisture has many colors: either it leans towards jaundice in color, or it is without redness, or black, or white, watery, and there are more."
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	"And these are the signs to know this assembly: if it is in the white syfac that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round, about the size of an egg, and the intestines do not open because it has moisture all around."
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	"And if there is moisture in the proper skin, then the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg;"
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	"And if the moisture is between the skin of the intestines and the white syfac, it can be felt well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, press all around with the quadrangular probe, as shown in the figure before."
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	"So according to what comes after the probe, judge what is inside."
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	"And when we operate with iron, it is necessary that the patient be as strong as possible and his body well-nourished; then he should lie on his back on something a little high, and many cloths should be placed under him;"
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	"then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right side, and extend the probe towards one of the two flanks of the intestines;"
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	"then take the spatula and cut the skin of the intestines along its length until near the anus, and make the incision straight, dividing the skin of the intestines up to the white syfac, and carefully cut according to your ability;"
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	"then pierce the syfac with a large puncture needle and draw out all the water, then place your ligatures and stretch the syfac upwards; and do not touch the intestines themselves, but only the syfac itself; cut carefully along its length, either whole or in pieces, so that if you do not cut sharply enough, the water will return;"
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the egg jumps away from your work, put it back in its place when you have finished working on the syfac; then suture the two leaves of the intestines together with one stitch, and heal it as other wounds, until it is healed."
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	"And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are suspended there, preventing bleeding; then cut the intestines along their entire length and remove the egg, and heal it as we have said."
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	"And if water is collected in two places together, know that these are two branches; cut the other branch just like you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood and place a linen cloth moistened with rose oil in the wound;"
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	"and place another linen cloth moistened in wine and oil on top of the two intestines, then cover it with doubled cloths and bind it along the entire length according to this figure:"
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	"Then take two cloths, stuff them with wool padding according to this shape and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches; one of the cloths should be placed on the buttocks up to the back, and the other at the anus; and the other two ends should be placed over the two angles, and all the restraint should be gathered together in the loop of the breeches;"
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	"And sometimes this branch is treated with a cautery instead of iron surgery, and it should be done by taking one small cautery needle, cutting the skin of the intestines, and heating it as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the water is exposed;"
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	"then take the cautery in this way and pierce one of these syfaces with ligatures, and burn it carefully with this hot cautery;"
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	"And cut in all ways that you can until you have removed everything; and take care that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and be careful of bleeding, and keep away from the intestines."
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	"And if anything goes wrong for you, such as heat rash or bleeding or other things, heal whatever is causing the problem according to what has been said before."
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	"And if the patient is fearful and cannot wait for this operation because of its unpleasantness, then perform a perforation as I will tell you, that is to say, when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that the watery branch is present,"
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	"have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the boil at its lowest point with the broad spatula and insert the perforation tube into the length of the body; make the puncture large enough for all the water to flow out;"
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	"then place cotton on the site and bind it, and let the remaining water drain out, then heal it until the wound is healed;"
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	"And if the linen cloth does not allow the water to flow out of the mouth of the wound, it is necessary to insert a pen or the instrument used to treat water from hydrocele patients, of which the shape is shown above; and enlarge one hole in the wound, and know that the water will return, and it will gather again after six months or so, and when it gathers as before, the patient will pass his days."
de l’aposteme des coions	"Of the boil on the intestines"
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	"Know that in the section of this branch there are many variations, which is why it seems to me that it is better left alone;"
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	"And I will tell you the operation and the appearances of the boil."
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	"I say therefore that many boils come on the body, and especially on the intestines; and this happens in many cases."
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	"This is to say by sour, acrid, or watery fluid that has spread to the intestines, or from impact;"
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	"and the color of the boil is according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, but it is a severe boil;"
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	"and sometimes there are serious, fearful and piercing boils with foul color, which may come from an artery or from swelling of a vein."
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	"When it is from an artery, it is known by the appearance of a hot boil when you press it with your fingers;"
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	"And it should not be touched."
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	"That which is caused by swelling of a vein is known by its appearance when touched with the fingers,"
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	"and one can make an incision on this boil and on others."
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	"And it is that you cut the cord of the intestines, then lift up the egg-shaped boil, and let out the white fluid from it, and deliver the suspensiony ligament from all around the boil."
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already solid with these new feathers, then you must pluck the egg, and the cock.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is air in the syringe or inside those in the vials, then you must remove all of that, and roundly pluck the cock.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the flesh is at the back, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are complete, apply linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the boil on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is a boil enclosed in an envelope resembling a blister, with softening of the buttocks
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient complains bitterly when they walk;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	And the treatment of this disease is almost as fearful as what has come before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	However, we will tell you about it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	You must have the patient sit on one elevated seat, then apply the suspensory bandage for the groin down to your thighs.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	Apply the entire basin that is close to the groin area, and the master holds it while stretching it firmly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut with a sharp, wide scalpel across the vessels until they are uncovered
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then I stick an needle with one doubled thread and tie it to the first place where the nerve has come and then tie it again to the other end
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them midway straight along the length of the body, and remove the corrupted membranes
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound like other open wounds so that no vessels flow into it to nourish one of the bones
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this means there comes no harm, and if the bone is completely severed in all its vessels then it should be treated for all the vessels
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels and they dry up and cannot help each other
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the nose
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The outcome of this injury is that the section comes to the face or extends up onto the abdomen in the region of the angles, causing the intestines to descend from that fracture towards one of the bones;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this dislocation occurs in the thigh or its extension, and these two types come from many causes: either by impact, jumping, carrying a heavy load, or similar actions
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the sign when it is an extension of the thigh is that it happens gradually over a long time and does not come suddenly
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the inflammation extends as far as the interior because the thigh presses on the intestines
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign when it is a cut in the thigh is that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various visible swellings under the skin, which is due to the leakage of intestines and blood from the wound in the thigh
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	Sometimes the rings are torn along with the intestines, which are retained inside and cause great suffering for the sick person, especially when they are pressed upon
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron wounds, it is necessary to avoid them
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	and the way to treat it is that you tell the sick person to push back their intestines with their hand inside the wound if they can reach them
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then have him lie on his back between your hands and lift up his thighs
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then raise the heart above it and cut away all the skin from the length of the thigh bone;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then place into the incisions of the flank nails according to what you need for opening the wound, and let them be such that the bone may exit.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then strip off the skin below the coat of the thighs until the entire white thigh flesh is exposed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then insert your two index fingers into what leads to the thigh, that which is between the white flesh under the skin of the egg, and between the second flesh
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate what is behind the egg and between the second flesh; then move your right hand into the thigh's heart and stretch the white flesh upwards with your left hand, and lift the egg together with all the flesh towards the flank.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	And command the assistant to extend the testicle upwards, and release what is behind the ligament
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	Then search with both hands if there is any intestines wrapped or hard white flesh and if you find anything like that, push it back into the belly cavity
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads and insert it into the rear part of the flesh that is behind the thigh skin, then cut the threads that appear from the needle until there are four left
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then gather them together in a cross-like manner and tie the flesh that we spoke of earlier (the one under the skin of the thighs) with a strong stitch of two parts
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the threads of the needle and tie them tightly with two parts so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter inside, so that no pus can come in
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	Then place the second stitch along the first one two fingers away from it and after these two stitches leave some flesh that is under the heart of the thighs hanging by a finger's width
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	And then follow the roundness that the egg carries, then cut in the part that is under the skin of the thighs until the sinew appears and the bowels as we said earlier
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then bring moistened wool in oil and place it on wounds, and bring the stitch that we spoke of
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes cauterize the white flesh that we have mentioned after the incision, for fear of bleeding
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happened many times and leave the stitch until it falls by itself; and if it takes too long to fall, then rise with warm water, and place what we have said on top of it until it falls
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with other cures until it is perfectly healed
de hernie carnouse	Hernia carnosum
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never saw anyone daring to perform the cure by iron
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is performed like the branch that is nearby, in such a way that you tie the vessels after the cut above lightly below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut into it, and treat the abscess of those who operate, until the vessels pour out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No rupture ever occurs among the intestines, as we have said, and the place opens up. And no part of the intestines descends to the incision, except a little, which is soon repaired.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And if it remains too long at this point, the wound will heal over or close up so that the intestines descend
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the expansion of the sinews which are around the intestines, as we have said, for they become stretched out, softened and swollen, opening up the place
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and this is treated with a hot iron, as we have said before. And it is never cured by surgery in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and then let the patient lie on his back with his hands between your knees, and cut the opening of the rupture from above downwards to the depth of three fingers
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then extract the sinew that is underneath the skin, then take a thread and tie it over the exposed surface of the sinew
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it firmly at the bottom of the abdomen, then sew up the two openings of the sinew over the top of the thread, sewing one and then the other
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then remove the top of the thread, and do not cut into the sinew nor stretch the wound any further, as I have told you in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then treat it according to the treatment for wounds. And when you have sewn up the incision, wash it and dress the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The sinew is contracted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is more effective at this point and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin around the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the anus in some men becomes softened due to the softening of the flesh that is inside, and it is unpleasant to see. And when one wants to treat it, let the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then join the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you wish, sew up the excess softened skin with three or four firm stitches. Then cut between the stitches and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the threads.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that castration is condemned in our law, and therefore I would like not to speak of it in this book. However, there are two reasons why it may be necessary: one is for the physician to know how to respond when asked about it and its treatment, and the other is because we often have need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and others. I therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by traction or by incision. In the method that we use traction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging. Then we take them in our hand until they relax and we can no longer feel them. For castration with an incision, we first tie the animal down, press the skin of the scrotum with our left hand, then make two incisions on each testicle after having skinned them well. We leave a small piece of the cord and the subtile testicle that is above the vessels. This method is milder than traction because sometimes some remains of the testicles may be left behind during traction, which could cause the animal to desire lust. Then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles opens also like the figure of a woman's nature, with hair and sometimes urine comes out. The other way is in women who have on their mons pubis both a penis and two testicles. The treatment for both men and women is to cut away all the excess flesh and treat it like other wounds. In the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Regarding hemorrhoids：
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	**Line-by-line translation:**
de erratique	Of the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	**Erratic:** Erratic is when the nature of woman is not pierced, or the opening is small; and it is either natural at birth, or accidental due to illness that has occurred, or caused by excess flesh adhering inside, whether thin or thick, and located deep in the womb, on the sides, below, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation; and its recognition is made through the inspection of the vulva. If the obstruction appears close to the vagina, then approach carefully with two fingers or a probe. If it is thin flesh adhering inside, then proceed quickly, and thus: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two fingers apart until the thin flesh is rounded, and lies over the obstruction; then take flaxseed, and moisten it in oil, and apply it to the area, and let the woman lie on her back each day so that it does not adhere. And if the obstruction is thick and rough, then you must cut with a scalpel similar to the shape of a bay leaf. If the obstruction is born from flesh, then suspend it on an onion and cut it; and have ready medicines that stop bleeding, such as achillea, dragon’s blood, incense, mixed with egg yolk; then prepare a wide bandage of linen so that the wound does not adhere; and thus let it be for a long time, and apply dry linen compresses; then treat with other treatments until it is healed. And when flesh comes loose in the womb, then it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For an enchanted aposteme that is in the womb, one should not dare touch it.
des emorroides	**Hemorrhoids:** Hemorrhoids are varicose veins inside or outside the anus; they appear as small lumps like bunches of grapes; some are internal and invisible from without, while others are external; they cause pain when defecating or sitting down; they can cause blood to flow freely during defecation or after, or only stain the toilet paper; sometimes they prolapse and come out at defecation; they are caused by constipation due to a bad diet, heavy lifting, or frequent diarrhea. The cure for them is to avoid their causes: eat healthy food that does not cause constipation, drink plenty of water, exercise regularly, do not lift heavy objects unnecessarily, and use ointments to relieve pain and inflammation. For internal hemorrhoids, surgery may be necessary if they are large or causing significant symptoms. Otherwise, rubber band ligation, sclerotherapy, or infrared coagulation can be used to treat them. For external hemorrhoids, warm sitz baths, witch hazel pads, and over-the-counter creams can provide relief. In severe cases, surgery may be necessary.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	**Hemorrhoids:** Hemorrhoids are varicose veins that do not normally appear on the surface of the skin, and when they become old they become hard. We have already mentioned their appearance, signs, and now I will mention those that require treatment. I say that hemorrhoids and piles that are deeply embedded in the rectum and cannot be felt, there is no cure with iron; those that are at the mouth of the rectum can be felt are those that can be treated. Therefore, place the woman in a cold house, then hold the forceps with tweezers and cut at its root, then sprinkle medicines that stop bleeding such as achillea, dragon's blood, incense, and similar things; then put her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; if there is bleeding, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, gall nuts, and similar things, and then make a plaster with barley flour, honey, and vinegar and apply it to her back. If it stops bleeding, that's good. If not, apply leeches on her back and breasts without cutting; then take linen and moisten it in plantain juice or buckthorn juice with old wine, and apply it to the wound. And when the boil is calm, treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head, so it must be cut as I have said for piles; then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	**Abscesses of the Rectum:** Abscesses of the rectum are localized collections of pus that can develop due to infection or injury to the tissues of the anorectal area. Symptoms may include pain, swelling, redness, warmth, and fever. Treatment typically involves incision and drainage of the abscess under local anesthesia to relieve pressure and allow the pus to drain out. This procedure is usually performed by a surgeon or colorectal specialist. If the abscess is deep-seated or associated with significant inflammation, the patient may require intravenous antibiotics to fight infection and prevent it from spreading. In some cases, a seton (a loop of suture material) may be placed into the abscess cavity to allow for ongoing drainage over time. It's important to note that untreated abscesses can rupture spontaneously, causing severe pain and potentially leading to serious complications such as sepsis or fistula formation. Therefore, prompt medical attention is crucial for proper diagnosis and treatment.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	**Hot Abscess of the Rectum:** A hot abscess of the rectum is characterized by intense pain, redness, heat, and fever at the onset. Here's how to treat it:
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The midwife's first task is to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the sign is when you see the woman hurry downwards and want to smell the air: then the child hurries to come out. Then you know that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the afterbirth is with its head, and the waters with it. And when you see these signs, then you must press her belly lightly so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends upon its head, then is the afterbirth with it, and the mother's womb is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. And he who comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes he comes upon his feet, and comes forth backwards or forwards, or the hands, or he comes upon his belly, or sometimes, and is turned by chance upon his neck, and in other evil figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and guard herself from error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes forth naturally upon its head and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool or let women hold her up; and raise her nature with oil of almonds or fennel cooked, and then place the midwife between her thighs the little spatula, whose form is as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And split the afterbirth and cut with your nail so that the waters inside come out; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman a suppository of ground fenugreek with sesame oil. Then make her sneeze with condisiin and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born. And if the two hands come forth first, then you must push them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift up her feet high; then overturn the seat upon the ground, and take care that the woman does not fall during the overturning; and if the hands cannot be pushed back, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the wrist that is marked here before, and extract the child, and push it back evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	If the child comes forth upon its feet:
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When a child comes onto its feet, then one must raise it up
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	Then slowly turn it little by little until it is aligned;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one of the feet and stretch it gently, bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can he jump up to his thighs? If so, have him command, "Take," and then cause him to sneeze.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If fire cautery, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if there is no cautery as we have said, then it should be turned little by little until it matches its natural shape
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it becomes easy
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if there is no cautery as we have said, take mastic from ancient plants, and oil of sesame seeds, and melted gum, grind all together in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	"And put upon this woman the nature of the ointment within and without."
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	"Then make her sit in cold water up to below her ribs;"
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	"And when she is moistened beneath, let her wear one collar of myrrh and place it underneath her, leaving it for an hour;"
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	"Then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child will now jump."
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	"of the child's exit onto its knees"
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this manner, then let him place his hands softly and softly upon it;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then have him lie on his neck, with his feet hanging down, lying on one bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	"And she folds her hands, pat-pat, then places them on the belly, removing pillows underneath until she is ready below."
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	"And if the child does not jump, take your feet and move them quickly, then bring your belly up, then place your hands."
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	"And pat-pat the child; command the woman to hold on until the child comes out."
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	"One hand comes out during the birth of the child"
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	"I must engineer bringing back the hand:"
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	"If it cannot be brought back, then raise the woman and go."
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	"If she cannot walk, lay her on one bed and push her legs wide apart."
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	"Then arrange the muscle tissue I described;"
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	"And if she does not give birth, seat her on a chair and then examine how to bring back the hand."
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	"And pat-pat the child according to nature's form, make her sneeze, and tell her to hold on until the child comes out."
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	"At the moment of birth, with its hands spread wide, facing its mother's back."
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	"I must have the baby seize her hand, then pat-pat gently and rock it lightly;"
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	"Once he is steady, apply the natural muscle tissue as oil we discussed earlier, then tell her to move gently."
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	"When you have done this, seat her on a chair and tell her to hold on; then make her sneeze."
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	"This same manner is used for the afterbirth."
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	"Once the afterbirth comes out this way, cut it with your nail until all the moisture is expelled;"
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	"And if the child's face and neck are pressed down, cut from the chin so that it does not stay stuck and the child dies;"
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	"Then put the baby inside until you have placed it correctly, and tell the woman to hold herself together from then on:"
adonques si istra legierement.	"Then she will give birth easily."
de l’issue des gemelz	"Regarding the birth of twins:"
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	"It is well known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or even four; this is not a strange thing and happens infrequently."
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	"Two are rare and do not live long;"
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	"I know this: they multiply themselves and are cut by the sieve who divides them, which is tied to the chin."
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	"Sometimes they come out naturally like any other child, as we have described."
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	"And if they cry out loudly, care for them as we have said, and the baby should be gentle and do everything quickly and easily;"
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	"Then act in whatever way is best for their health."
de plusors enfans	"Regarding multiple births:"
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	"It sometimes happens that they are formed in the mother's womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more, up to fifteen; and they are all perfectly formed like a child according to God's will."
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	"And the midwife should know about this, because such things can happen;"
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	"So she should act accordingly."
de l’enfant mort	Regarding a stillborn child:
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When treating a woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the section on this matter, and if no fluid comes out, then you are compelled to perform manual operations.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	Therefore, you must know whether the woman is of sound health, and if she does not have any complications or if she fears death,
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If a woman must be supported on her back, with her shoulders tilted downwards, and her legs raised up.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister will apply traction to two parts, or secure it to the bed so that it cannot move during childbirth
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the woman in labor with moist oil containing musk, fenugreek seeds, and flaxseed powder, then apply these oils and powders to the hands of the attendants.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then put your fingers gently into the woman's vagina, then seek one place where you can grasp the loops that are suitable for this purpose
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and be careful that the child is facing downwards so it descends headfirst
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If you hook your fingers in his ears or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the scrotum or close to the sides
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if delivery is on footing, then hook or grasp it by the middle of its sides
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he grasp the loop with his right hand, and place the hook between the fingers of his left hand, and insert his hand gently up to the wrist, and grasp the loop at one of these points we have mentioned, until the child emerges empty
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the loop
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert another loop opposite the first one, or a third if necessary, so that the extraction is even
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then pull evenly in both directions, moving back and forth, so that the child may be born more easily, and the loops should be toothed to hold it firmly, as shown here
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there is still a part remaining, then let the attendant anoint some of his fingers with oil and insert them into that part, and draw out the other part
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there is still none remaining, then move this loop higher up and do so until the child is completely born.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other and he cannot bring it back to perform the extraction
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must wrap a cloth around both hands so that they emerge together
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then grasp the baby at the heel joint or the knee, and do likewise with the other hand, using both hands
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the hips of the child are large and it is stuck in the outlet or has an acute head coming together,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	It is necessary for you to place the spine-like spatula between your two hands, then press it firmly and draw out the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can roll it with the instrument called "almidach," from which its form comes along with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do likewise if the child has a naturally large head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	"And then grasp the bones with tongs,"
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	"If the hip joint protrudes and is restrained by forceps, it should be cracked open until all moisture in the bone marrow has been expelled;"
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	"And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a saw where you are able to."
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	"If it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, it should be punctured until the moisture flows out."
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"And if the child is on its feet, traction will be light, and the alignment of the mouth of the marrow will be easy."
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	"And if it is tight in the abdomen or on the bone, then extract it using one cloth wrapped around the hand."
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	"Open the abdomen or the bone until the moisture flows out;"
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	"And if the other limbs are dislocated and the hip joint remains in place,"
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	"then insert his hand deep into the marrow and draw it up to the mouth of the marrow;"
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	"then place one or two fingers inside, and draw it out."
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	"And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted due to a hot boil that has formed there, then one should not attempt to manipulate it,"
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	"but rather apply moist and fatty substances;"
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	"And use poultices, and make compresses with softened and moistening herbs."
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	"And if the child is on its side and you are able to place it flat, then apply what we have said for a living child;"
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	"But if one does not have the strength to do so, then draw out the hip joint in pieces and leave no part of the afterbirth behind."
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	"And once you have done this, if any hot boils appear on the marrow, apply what we have said for treating them;"
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	"But if bleeding occurs, it should be placed in cold water to restrict it, and other treatments applied."
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	"I saw a woman whose child had been bitten in the abdomen by one mouse, then another mouse came and bit the other."
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	"After many days, an abscess formed on her cheekbone and swelled so much that it opened up, causing great pain."
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	"I was called to treat her, but after thinking about it for some time, I could not heal the wound."
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	"I applied a poultice with strong drawing power and out came one bone, then after a few days another."
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	"I was greatly amazed at this because the abdomen has no bones."
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	"So I thought it must be the bones of a dead fetus."
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	"I cleaned the wound and drew out many more bones until the woman began to improve;"
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	"and the woman lived for a long time in this way, with a little blood oozing from the wound sometimes;"
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	"And I am recording this chapter here only so that when the master encounters something unusual, he may know how to treat it."
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"on bringing the hip joint back into place"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressure bandage, with which one wraps the books; and at two turns around the two heads of the two ribs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Moreover, let the horns be more subtle in the restraint, and let them be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	"And let the mouth of the bellows be two fingers wide, and the edges of the blades one finger wide, and long one and a half palms."
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	"And between the two limbs there should be two joints of this same wood, which close in one and open in the other, half a palm long or a little more."
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	"And these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the bellows to open it when one turns the two corners."
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	"A more refined and lighter form is made of ebony or boxwood, resembling the shape of tongs;"
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	"and at both ends it has two joints, each one a palm long and two fingers wide;"
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	"And when you see the bellows open completely with the instrument, have the woman sit on one bed, her feet hanging down and her legs open,"
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	"then insert the two joints together into the bellows, and hold the end of the instrument under her thighs;"
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	"then open your hand on the whole instrument, just like with tongs, according to the amount you see opening the mouth of the bellows, until the ball is done."
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	"These instruments are all mounted and have multiple similar forms. And when the master has prepared them, he who operates is faster in his work, and higher in esteem among men for his skill."
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	"Therefore do not disregard the instrument until you have prepared it, for its usefulness is not negligible."
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	"When the midwife is assisting at childbirth, you must command the mother to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with camphor, and keep your hands over her mouth and nose;"
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	"And if she faints because of this, so much the better."
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	"If not, take one pot, make a hole in the lid, and put herbs inside that can open the mouth of the bellows, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, celery seed, and cumin;"
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	"all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire. Then put one end of a tube into the hole in the pot and the other end into the mouth of the bellows;"
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	"and hold it there until the vapor comes inside the bellows. Then make her sneeze, as we have said."
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	"If the midwife acts quickly,"
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	"And if the midwife remains afterwards and is not satisfied, command the woman to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or with white wax, and then put it into the vagina,"
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	"and search for the baby. And when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it out little by little straight, so that the bellows does not slip out;"
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	"but she must move it gently to the right and left, and then pull it. It will come and be delivered."
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	"And if the mouth of the bellows is too narrow, we have described the treatment of sneezing and the fumigation with herbs;"
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	"and if she is not helped by any of these things, make sure you do not pull too hard;"
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	"but the one who is at the mouth of the bellows should tie it to the woman's hip, and then administer an enema with tetrapharmakon oil;"
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	"This will allow her to push and deliver the baby. However, when she pushes, bad odors may come from her stomach and head, causing discomfort for the woman."
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	"Therefore, appropriate fumigations should be applied at this time. Many of the ancients have tried fumigations with watercress and dried figs."
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The shape of the instrument used for fumigation of the woman during childbirth and delivery is as follows:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	"And it resembles a tube made of glass. The narrow end is placed in the vagina, and the wide ends are held over the fire;"
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	"and the fumigation should be done with charcoal. Hold it there until it is exhausted, then start another one."
de percier lou fondement	"to pierce the anus"
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	"Many children are born whose anus has not been pierced, but rather obstructed by a subtle membrane;"
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	"therefore the woman should pierce this membrane with her thumb, without touching it with any sharp instrument, and she must take care not to touch it;"
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"then apply a compress moistened in wine and oil, and continue the treatment until it is healed."
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you suspect that it has not healed, insert a silver tube into the hole and leave it there for several days. It should be removed when the child is ready to go to its room."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	"Sometimes this obstruction can be caused by a sudden eruption or boil. In such cases, the eruption should be opened and treated as described for the silver tube."
de la fistule dou fondement	"of a fistula of the anus"
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	"Fistulas that come from under the anus are usually nodular and grow larger than those that come beside the anus or in the space between the two buttocks;"
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	"if there is one fistula or more, and when the nodular fistula is old, it opens on its own. However, if it does not open on its own, use a sharp needle or fine knife to incise it;"
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	"and sometimes these fistulas are persistent. They can be recognized by the fact that there is a discharge of pus or wind when the person has a bowel movement, and occasionally a worm may emerge;"
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	"And there are fistulas that penetrate all the way to the bladder and halfway up the penis. Some reach as far as the hip joint, and others reach as far as the thighbone."
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	"Thus one can recognize a persistent fistula of the anus that is not persistent;"
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	"and it is necessary to insert your index finger into the anus and then insert a fine needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature;"
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	"And if there is curvature, insert a fine silver probe or a horsehair until you feel it with your finger;"
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	"and if you do not feel it and there is no discharge of pus, wind, or worm coming from the opening, as we have described;"
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	"know that it does not penetrate. Be quick to treat it."
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when a fistula extends all the way to the bladder or the urethra, urine flows out of it and cannot be stopped with medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	"If it has penetrated as far as the hip joint, the probe will reach there;"
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	"if there is no curvature and there is inflammation around it, then it has always been present, and there is no need for medication or cauterization;"
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	"and in these persistent fistulas, there is no other remedy than hard work, and the vain boasting of foolish physicians who meddle with them."
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	"In one that is not persistent or old, there is hope for healing by means of iron, as I have experienced;"
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	"And the person should lie face down in your hands, with their legs raised up to the hips and the hips tilted towards the abdomen;"
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	"then insert an iron probe or silver if there is curvature, until you know where it emerges."
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it around their fundament, then you must place your two index fingers there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Next, feel if the tendon has pierced through; and whether it is exposed or you can feel between your fingers skin or flesh, then know that it has pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is always said that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	"and the aid that is done there, if it is done, then heat the cautery thinly according to the width of the fistula, as it is said before."
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	"And push it all hot into the fistula until it reaches the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that these broken veins have been burned, which resemble an eagle's feather."
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	"And then, the dressing of wet cloths is applied until that broken vein comes out; then the application of ointment between flesh and skin."
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	"If it is thus healed, that's good. But if not, there is no other way to heal it:"
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	"And if the tent enters and does not reach to the thumb which is at the fundament, and between your two fingers there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula coming out from under this covering near the heart:"
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	"then cut through the beginning of the fistula, and push the tent forward again, and then apply the cautery until it reaches the tip of the tent."
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	"And thus the tent will be delivered and fall away; then burn those broken veins which resemble an eagle's feather, and nothing will remain."
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"If the skin becomes inflamed, and cracks between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	"For the cautery of fire accomplishes two things: namely, it burns those broken veins together and stops the flow of blood and dries up the moisture."
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	"then apply dressings moistened with hot water or crushed herbs until the place becomes soft and the burned vein comes out from the flesh;"
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	"then dress the wound with healing ointments that are applied between hard flesh, and these are dried medicines."
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is thus restored, it will be healed and not return again."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes right up from the fundament but is distant from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and feel with it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	"If you feel the tent with your thumb and there are two layers between it – skin or flesh – where it is about to burst, then there should be no fear of danger or despair, for there are three ways to manage this:"
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	"either you cauterize it as we have described, or cut through it completely until it reaches the bottom, or if you can push a tent into it and dress it as before."
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	"but do not go too deep lest you cut the tissue that supports the fundament, so that evacuations can pass without difficulty;"
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	"then dress it as we have described;"
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	"perhaps it will then be healed, or you can remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the fundament with a tent or another pointed instrument;"
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	"then burn the broken veins in the wound as much as possible;"
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	"then endeavor to restore the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: this will be easier for the patient."
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	"And there are sometimes fistulas of this kind: when you push the tent into the fistula and it is located on the side of the fundament near the skin above;"
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	"then take a tent with a hole at its tip like this:"
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And thread two turns of thread onto it, then insert the tent all the way down to its tip into the fistula."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	"If it passes through the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you can insert your thumb into the fundament;"
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	"then pull on the end of the thread and draw the two holes together, tying them tightly to each other, and leave it in place for one or two days;"
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	"and tie it again if necessary until the thread cuts through those veins that are between them and they close up;"
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	"then dress the wound until it is healed."
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not open on its own, then make an incision in any way that you can, if it is not too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For one should not cut too deeply for the sake of making a hole and then dress it as we have described until it is healed."
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	"The shape of the spinal comb used to open a fistula is most often pointed and cutting;"
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	"and on the other hand, it should not be wide so that one does not cut what ought not to be cut, as you can see here:"
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	"There are two kinds of hemorrhoids: those that are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there can be small or large ones. Sometimes they bleed outside;"
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	"and there is one or more of them, and they are located outside the fundament at its tip. But those that are outside have less moisture;"
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	"and they are usually covered with a little yellow mucus or blood, and they have the color of skin;"
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	"The treatment for those who have hemorrhoids inside the fundament is to tell the patient to strain while going to the privy until the fundament protrudes and the veins are emptied;"
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	"then act quickly, take hold of it with forceps or your fingernail, then cut through its root;"
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	"And if the nails cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth or cotton or a piece of linen;"
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	"then pull them out with your thumbs, cut them off and apply some warm powders instead of cauterizing;"
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	"or cauterize them as is described in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed."
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	"And if the fundament cannot protrude, then administer a strong and sharp enema to wash out what is inside the fundament so that it can come out openly;"
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	"when the patient strains, if the veins are protruding from the fundament, then treatment will be easy;"
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	"And it is necessary to take hold of them with your fingernail or forceps and cut them off, then treat them as we have described until they are healed, and the patient fears being cut by a knife."
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	"The stitch must be made in this way: take a thread and pass it through a needle, then pull the thread upwards and pierce the needle from below, and turn both ends of the thread down under the needle;"
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	"and tie it tightly, then knot the thread and remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, leaving one loose to drain any excess blood;"
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	"then place a warm cloth moistened with rose oil or wax on the fundament and tell the patient to rest;"
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And then leave it alone until they fall out, and when they do, treat them with ointment and other remedies until they are healed."
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	"on the drying of fistulas in the fundament"
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	"Sometimes there is a drying up of fistulas in the intestines due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps;"
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	"It is necessary that you scrape off with the tip of a scalpel or your fingernail the skin above it which might otherwise become moist;"
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	"then treat it until it is dry as needed;"
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	"And if it cannot be dried up, then scrape more vigorously until it heals completely and is scraped raw;"
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal until he is well
dou fremit	fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	An ant is a small animal that lives near the body and moves very quickly;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes it finds the bone, and one feels it like death from shivering, and it comes throughout the body, but more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure for this is that you take a goose feather quill or a strong turkey feather quill, and place it on the shivering until the circle around it encloses the entire shivering.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around the quill so that you encircle the entire shivering and drive it deep in, and crush its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you see this, do so with a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and pointed above:"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	"However, do not pierce too deeply to hold the two together and apply pressure. And if you see this, cauterize the trembling, as it is said in front or in the chapter on cautery."
de la forme dou clistere	"of the form of the enema"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	"No one ever makes an enema of silver or copper, or melted brass or lead; and no one ever makes them of these small and large instruments, according to which they are ordered."
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Therefore, those that should be used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small."
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The form of the small and large enema is as follows, where the belly is tied according to this manner:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	"And there should be an opening where the belly is tied, as you see here, and the feces inside should be pierced; and it should have two holes on one side and one on the other."
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	"And let the belly where one puts the medications be a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes,"
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	"And let there be between each hole one grain of spice, then put in these holes one strong thread of thick twisted cotton around ten or eleven times, and fasten the belly like a goat."
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	"And when the medication is inside, tie it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then perform the enema; and this is the form of the circle:"
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	"And let the medication not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or dough made from an egg white, or something similar, then put it in gently."
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	"Then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is all squeezed out, then remove the enema and have the patient raise their legs at the edge of the bed,"
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	"and if the medication wants to come out, then tie it as much as you can; and if he sleeps all night like that, it is more helpful."
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform an enema on someone with diarrhea and the medication comes out quickly, then start it again until it is finished."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	"And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or have an ulcer, let the enema be as subtle as for a one-year-old child;"
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	"and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be strained:"
des plaies	"wounds."
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	"We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medications, according to their completion."
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to where the wounds are made, and what they are made from."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	"The things by which wounds are made are: blows with stones, cuts with swords and knives or lances, clubs, sticks, or similar objects;"
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	"or those that are made according to the locations on the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, head, face, belly, liver, and similar members;"
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	"And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come in its chapter."
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	"I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it was caused by a blow with stones or similar objects, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large,"
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	"and quickly clean the hot ulcer: do it gently with the cephalic balm even if there is a little blood coming from the wound, and let the ointment be applied on the opposite side of the wounded part;"
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	"and keep the patient from overeating wine and fatty foods."
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	"And if it does not want to be cleaned, then soften its flesh, and do not let it drink wine or eat meat;"
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	"and put on the wound, if hot ulcers come, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in styptic wine;"
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	"And if there are no hot ulcers, put on the wound powder that I will tell you about later, if it is fresh with all its blood and has not been moved by the air."
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the air has moved it, put on some ointments until it is healed."
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	"And if the wound is large, like a cut from a sword or similar objects, and the lips cannot be brought together by force, then bring them together by stitching, as I will tell you about in the treatment of abdominal wounds."
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	"If the wound is open to the bone and hangs down and only holds on by a little bit, then cut it off. Then treat the wound with medication and replace hard flesh in place of skin."
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	"and order the patient to eat fatty foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar things."
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	"And if you find rottenness in the skin but not to the bone, then cut out all the rotting flesh and throw it away, then treat the wound;"
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	"And if there is an artery in the wound that bleeds without clotting and it cannot be stopped with medications, then tie off the artery. And if you find it dislocated, then secure it with a thread."
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	"And if that does not help, then cauterize it."
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	"And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should put in this powder that welds before the air has moved it."
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	"And the way to make the powder is: take incense in one part; dragon's blood, two parts; quicklime, three parts, and grind it finely;"
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	"and fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly until it is well aired and joined together with all its blood;"
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	"then tie it up well, and do not untie it if it does not swell, because the medication should not be removed until the wound is healed."
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	"Sometimes this can also be done with quicklime alone when incense and dragon's blood are not available, but only if the air has not moved the wound."
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	"And if the air has moved the wound, especially in summer, do not put this powder on it at all;"
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	"but put on digested ointments or poultices made from barley flour and water and honey until it sweats."
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Then treat it with other treatments until it is healed."
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	"And if there is a bone fracture along with the wound and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;"
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	"I will tell you about fractures of the head later on."
de la plaie dou col	"Of the wound on the neck"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, except when the nerve of the neck or an artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	"If it's a nerve, there is no other remedy than to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it because that harms the nerves and makes them retreat;"
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	"and do not put anything cold on the wound because nerve tissue is cold and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member;"
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	"but let the medication be warm, like hot water mixed with sweet oil and honey, also washed in hot water;"
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	"and other mines of stone according to this manner, and moist anointments."
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then stitch it up with thread and bind it with bandages until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	"And if the wounds are deep and full of infection and bowels, then pierce them below or further down,"
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	"and if the artery is cut and there is a flow of blood coming out, then tie it off, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary;"
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	"And if the spine or heart is cut and the vessels are preserved so that the flesh remains alive,"
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	"then stitch up the heart along the side of the neck, without touching the throat but putting it back into its natural shape."
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	"and then bind it tightly and leave it for a few days before curing it with drying ointments until it heals."
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	"And if the wound has caused an impression on the bone, remove it;"
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	"and if there are pieces of bone, draw out those that you can easily reach; those that you cannot have removed, leave them alone until the wound becomes gangrenous,"
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	"and remove and ligate any discharge;"
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	"And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder that I have mentioned."
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	"And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, cure it as I have said in its chapter."
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	"Regarding wounds from spears or daggers,"
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	"If it's a wound from a spear or dagger and the wound is deep, observe whether there are any signs of wind escaping from the wound where the patient breathes: then know that the wound is mortal."
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	"But if it's not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, don't put any powder on it or tie it at first hour so that the blood doesn't sink in too deep,"
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	"and let it flow towards the heart, causing death to the patient;"
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	"But apply an attracting ointment and tie it twice a day;"
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	"And if you don't have any ointment, put some old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture."
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	"And make the patient lie on their side for 3 days or 4 days or more;"
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	"So that there will be no spasm, nor trembling of the heart, nor coughing."
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	"And when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved."
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"So cure it then with dressings and other treatments until it heals;"
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	"And if it cannot heal and opens up again, know that there is a fistula present; so treat it as it should be treated."
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	"And if the wound is an incision from a sword or dagger, whether it's simple, deep, or on the back, treat it as those that are on the front;"
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	"If it's large, stitch it up; if it's small, sprinkle powder on it. And if it's close to the bone and has cut off pieces of flesh, remove the wound and draw out any discharge if they are visible;"
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	"And if they are not visible, let the wound gangrene and then ligate the drainage."
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	"And the treatment for wounds on other limbs is judged in the same way as we have said."
dou derrompement dou ventre	"Regarding rupture of the abdomen"
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	"The ruptures of the abdomen are large, medium, and small;"
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	"A large rupture can sometimes cause the intestines or the nerves of the intestines to protrude through it;"
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	"And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small rupture is worse than a large one,"
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Because when one resets it more often, the intestines are put back in place little by little;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because the intestines swell up so much that they feel cold, so they cannot be reset.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And therefore it is necessary to move the wounded flesh, so that one may reset the intestines to their place like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you should know that intestinal rupture occurs in four ways
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common sutures occur in the abdominal suture,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	"And the stitching of other wounds of the body, two other stitches are common for other wounds;".
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	"However, they are more appropriate with abdominal suturing, and I will mention each one and explain."
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	"I say that when the wound is small and no part of the intestine has come out,"
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	"and if it is necessary to replace it, this is done in one of two ways:"
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	"or because the wound is small, as we have said,"
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	"or because the intestine is swollen with cold."
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	"And when it is cold, heat it in this manner:"
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	"Soak a sponge or one piece of cloth in hot water only,"
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	"or cook it in boiling water with vinegar and cumin,"
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	"and raise the intestine until the swelling has gone away;"
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	"And sometimes this wine astringent is made, and it is useful to use for desswelling."
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	"And when you see the swelling diminish, then mix the intestine with water or with salt water in which herbs have been cooked,"
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	"because by this method the entrance to the wound is almost closed;"
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	"And if it cannot enter, then open the wound a little with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;"
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	"and the first treatment is useful to make the cut;"
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	"That no one should cut without great necessity being present;"
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	"And this is the instrument for splitting it open:"
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	"So cut into the curve and do not go too deep, and here is its shape:"
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	"And when the wound has become enlarged and the intestine has come out,"
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	"then put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper place,"
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	"If you are able to do so, for this is most useful."
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	"When the wound is large and it is located below the belly,"
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	"It is necessary that you make the sick person lie on his back,"
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	"And put his legs higher than his head;"
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	"And if it is located below the belly,"
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	"then put the head and chest higher than the parts below."
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	"And also, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts,"
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	"then take care that the injured part is higher than the other;"
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	"And thus it is necessary to arrange what I say in large and moderate wounds."
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	"In small wounds, put what you are equipped with,"
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	"then have between your hands one gentle minister who will pull all the rupture with his hand,"
et assemble les levres;	"And join the lips;"
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	"This is the common manner of stitching."
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	"And it is necessary that you take one needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,"
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave at the head of the wound two threads of spice, and insert a needle with one good strong thread attached.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two holes in the skin with the two holes in the syringe,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	"Which is underneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part,"
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	"And join the two heads of the siphac together with the four."
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	"Then tie a doubled thread around the needle on both sides,"
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	"Then join the two heads of the wound together,"
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	"And then leave one finger's width, and stick in another needle;"
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	"then tie the thread like you did for the first needle,"
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	"And continue doing this according to how many needles you need."
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Until the entire wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	"And let the needles be of medium size, neither too fine nor too coarse,"
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	For thin needles cut all the flesh, and thick ones cannot go in well enough:"
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore they must be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	And it is not necessary to put the needles too deep into the flesh and skin,"
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	for they would cut and open up the wound before stitching.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	"Then clip the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the sick person while sleeping,"
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	"And you should put caps or cloths on the heads of the needles to prevent movement."
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	"Leave them until the wound is healed,"
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	"And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds,"
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	For it requires only one or two needles
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second suture is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	And you shall assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the hip together with one needle having a medium strong thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced all four of these bones together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	"Then reset the needle at the point where you began, as one cuts cloth."
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	"And space each stitch the thickness of a middle finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	"This seam seals the limb,"
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	"I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly,"
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	"who was wounded by a knife,"
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	"And the wound was more than a palm's breadth wide,"
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	"and it showed more than two palms' worth of intestines."
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	"The wound was in his belly."
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	"I reset the intestine twenty-four hours after it had been dislocated,"
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	"And the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated it, and he recovered."
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	"And the physicians had judged that he would die, but this was a miracle;"
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	"and I did not treat him with ointments, for there were none available in the place where we were, nor any medicine."
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	"I simply put on a little cotton twice a day and washed him with honey water until he healed."
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	"Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:"
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	"Take the needle and pass it from the outside to the inside."
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	"When it has pierced through the heart straight on, then let go of the needle's end or the point where you inserted the needle,"
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	"and make it pierce again from inside to outside."
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	"And the purpose of this suturing method is that you stitch as skinners sew hides,"
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	"so that once you release the needle on one side, you pick it up again on the other, until the entire stitch is complete."
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	"The second method of suturing, which Galen describes correctly,"
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	"is to approximate the two parts naturally together,"
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	"and press one end of the needle against the other, like this:"
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	"insert a needle close by and pierce only that spot,"
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	"and leave both ends of the needles."
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	"then turn the needle and pass it from outside to inside,"
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	"so that both ends of the needles are inside,"
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	"then pierce both sides from outside to inside in two other nearby spots that are opposite each other."
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	"And this is the second and most common method of suturing."
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	"Galen said this, and some confirm it,"
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	"That one should suture the belly with two needles, each having thread."
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	"And one must insert one needle on this side and the other on that side, like those who sew hides:"
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	"And know that when a wound is inside the belly,"
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	"the stitching is tighter than in other parts of the belly."
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	"The judgment of wounds is such as for other wounds:"
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	"And that when you find the wound fresh and full of blood before it has been moved,"
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	"then quickly remove the intestines and the cut, then apply powdered gum around the edges."
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	"If it has been moved, then apply some ointment that is available until the wound closes."
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	"And cut the thread and tie the needle ends and edges."
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"Then treat the wound as others, until it heals."
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	"And if you don't have medicines, then apply cotton wool immediately when it starts to close,"
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	"and change it twice a day until it heals."
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	"For in many cases where wounds are simple, you don't need any other medicine besides cotton wool."
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	"And if you suspect that the wound does not communicate with the main organs,"
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	"then it is necessary to moisten a light linen cloth in warm oil of wild thyme or rose oil,"
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	"and apply it around the angles and under the armpits;"
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens,"
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	"then apply black wine enemas and especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestines."
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	"And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one."
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	"The intestine called 'jejunum' cannot heal when it is wounded,"
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	"And this is because of the thinness of its walls and the delicacy of all the body and its proximity to the nerves."
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	"If the spleen jumps out of the wound, then put it back in as quickly as possible, while still fresh,"
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	"And if it is old and become black or full of worms, then tie the spot that is black so that no blood flows there,"
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	Then cut what is between the ligaments,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the two bones that are below the wound outwards until they fall on either side of the wound to facilitate extraction when the joint drops, and let the wound gape.
de la routure dou boueil	from dislocation of the eyeball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	can it be restored in any way?
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it was inflamed and became a fistula, and the evacuation and wind escaped through it.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease until he was healed, and the joints were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient might still have an illness in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but it remained in better positions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take fresh large testicles, then gather the edges of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	"When the tremor has opened its mouth, place it over the two lips."
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	"So that she pulls her mouth away."
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	"And then he cuts off the head, and this holds so that it cannot be loosened,"
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	"Then puts another bandage afterwards in the same manner as before until the wound is entirely covered;"
et cout la plaie.	"And sew up the wound."
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	"This head enters into the intestines and causes no harm to the patient,"
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	"and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread which has been cut from an animal's intestine,"
en teil maniere:	"in this manner:"
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	"Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very skinned,"
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	"And then tie to the head of this thread a fine twisted linen thread,"
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	"then pass the thread through the needle and sew up the intestine and draw it back into its opening;"
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	"And this manner of sewing with bandages is not foreign to those who seek confidence and hope."
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	"But if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the main intestines, there is no device nor remedy except for subtlety."
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	"of fistula wherever it may be"
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	"Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows old, is universally called a 'fistula',"
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	"And especially when it is healed and returns inside."
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	"A fistula is, according to its true nature, a hard and white knot or node, where no pain is felt,"
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	"And its head is as sharp as a bird's feather;"
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	"Sometimes it jumps clear and straight; other times it is thick;"
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	"Sometimes soft, sometimes sufficient;"
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	"I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not clean and lacks flesh,"
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	"is only so by one of the eight causes:"
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	"That is to say, due to the smallness of blood or body;"
ou por sa malice;	"or because of its wickedness;"
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	"or because there is hard flesh within and on the lips, which prevents flesh from growing;"
ou il i a trop de bowe;	"or if there is too much bow;"
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	"or if the wound is closed up, and the material is of poor quality;"
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	"or if the medicine used for treatment was not good;"
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	"or because the corruption is a matter of pestilence;"
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	"or because the property in that region has delayed digestion and healing, and it naturally tends towards inflammation."
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	"or if there are veins or bones present;"
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	"I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medicinal treatments in the relevant section."
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now I must tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work."
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	"You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body;"
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	"for there are fistulas which come from large veins and arteries and nerves,"
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	"or from the sinews, intestines, bladder, or ribs;"
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	"or from the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet."
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	"And sometimes it comes to the property of the main member and similar places."
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	"All such fistulas are difficult to heal, and there is only labor involved in their treatment, along with ignorance;"
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	"And if there is any fistula that does not reach the places I have mentioned, you can be confident about its treatment,"
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	"And you will recognize it; so take an awl of iron or bronze, and if the fistula is straight, bore into it;"
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	"and if the fistula is curved, search for it with a thin lead probe."
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	"because lead will bend more easily around the curvature;"
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	"And if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search for it well with probes,"
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	"then irrigate it through one of the perforations."
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	"because moisture will flow from one perforation to another and cleanse them;"
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	"then probe gently so that you know if there is bone or nerve present, and how deep it goes."
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	"And ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when your hand presses on them, and where they feel it."
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	"and once you know exactly where the fistula is located, and if it is far from a joint or nerve, artery, or vein,"
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	"then cut into it according to what I have told you."
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	"And remove the breach and corrupted tissue that is inside;"
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	"And then treat it until it is healed;"
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	"If the fistula is very deep in its direct course, you must cut deeply into it as far as you can,"
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	"then insert moistened probes dipped in hot medicine and push them up to the head of the fistula;"
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	"until the medicine corrodes all the excess tissue that remains at the bottom."
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"And then apply warm applications of clean, healing liniments until it is healed;"
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	"If it does not heal with these methods, cauterize it as we have said;"
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	"And if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut into it."
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	"If a vein or nerve troubles you in the main members, as we have said,"
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	"And if bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it away until all the corruption is removed;"
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	"then treat it with warm applications of clean, healing liniments until it is healed."
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	"If it does not heal and again becomes inflamed as before,"
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	"know that you have not yet reached the bottom:"
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	"So uncover and probe until you reach the bottom;"
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	"And remove all the corruption, then dress it properly."
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	"and if it is healed in this way, that's good."
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	"But if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;"
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	"So there is no other remedy than leaving it alone to nature:"
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	"And if there is a small piece of corrupted bone that you can grasp with forceps,"
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	"remove it with an appropriate instrument;"
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	"And if there are many pieces of bone, crush them all finely and leave not one behind;"
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	"If moisture opposes you, and there is no mistake or fear,"
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	"then cut through flesh, moisture, and bone, and free the bones."
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	"And if you cannot remove them at once, apply a warm poultice to absorb corruption;"
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	"and leave it until the surrounding area is softened;"
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	"then they will be easier to remove."
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	"And if it is a large bone, such as in the thigh or leg,"
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	"scrape off only the corruption until all blackness is removed;"
puis restoure la plaie;	"then dress the wound."
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	"And if there is much corrupted flesh reaching up to the bone,"
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	"It must be scraped down to the corruption and then treated until it is solid;"
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	"I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in one man's leg,"
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	So that you may take example and aid from this in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg caused by something that entered his body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	Until the matter came to the leg,
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	"But physicians through their folly operated so much upon him that they opened up the abscesses."
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	"and as they scraped away many materials, it turned into a fistula, and there came many openings that all poured out bowels and moisture from the body."
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	"And for about two years many physicians treated him, but there was no skilled surgeon among them,"
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	"So I was called in, and saw his leg and the medications they were treating him with,"
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	"And what ran through the openings was great corruption."
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	"And the young man's skin became red, and he had a lemon-colored hue."
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	"I applied a poultice to one of these openings, and then searched for all the openings,"
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	"and found that they were connected to each other throughout the whole leg."
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	"I therefore hurried and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a portion of the bone,"
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	"and found it rotten and penetrated by corruption which had reached the bone inside."
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	"I removed what appeared to me of the rotted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption besides what I had taken out,"
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	"And began to dress the wound with dry medicines for a long time, but could not heal it."
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	"Then I reopened and again discovered the bone as before,"
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	"And found that the corruption had continued into the bone, and scraped it away and removed it, and then tried to heal the wound."
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	"But I could not do so until I cut around about a palm's width of bone and completely removed it."
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	"Then I dressed it with medicines, and he was soon healed and soundly."
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	"And there was no need to reopen the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not tolerate,"
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	"and because of my fear that he might die."
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	"For after the evacuation of blood he often swooned, but nevertheless he was entirely healed,"
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	"And in the place of the bone there grew hard flesh, and he was in good condition and suffered neither harm nor disadvantage at any time thereafter."
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	"And if the bone is broken anywhere else in the body, it should be treated as follows:"
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	"Take one linen cloth, and bind it around the head of the exposed bone,"
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	"and command him to stretch it upwards;"
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	"And put another thicker linen band on top of the first one, and tie it over the flesh that is above the bone,"
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	"And stretch out the head so that you can pull out the rotted flesh underneath,"
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	"And uncover the flesh where you want to see it, so that the bone does not blanch the flesh."
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	"And put a hot ember or a red-hot iron under the bone to burn away the rotted flesh;"
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	"And this must be done until one can see and feel that the rottenness is gone, and it must still be repeated."
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	"If the bone itself is rotten and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part,"
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	"then uncover all the flesh; then put a hot ember underneath,"
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	"and then scrape away the corruption from one part to the other with an iron that is as long as the corruption itself, as we have said;"
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	"And if the corruption is in a joint, cut away the rotted joint and scrape the bone that it contains from the other side,"
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	"If the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no other choice but to cut it away."
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	"And if the corruption is at the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, that is very serious indeed,"
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	"But nonetheless you must inquire how this corruption opens up,"
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	"And clean it in every way that you can, but make sure that the veins or nerves do not get in your way;"
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	"and know that there are many types of incisions and irons for cutting these bones according to their position and appearance,"
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	"according to their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;"
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	"And therefore it is necessary to equip each type of bone with its appropriate instrument."
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	"And know that this work will show you the instrument that you will need according to your knowledge of this art,"
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	"and the testimony of the ways in which diseases occur;"
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	"So consider the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate for it."
dou feu	"from fire"
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	"The flesh decays either due to an internal cause or due to a lack of something."
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	"And when you have treated that corruption with medicinal cures and they do not help,"
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	"then it is necessary to cut off that member until the place where the corruption begins,"
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	"So that the sick person escapes from death through this means, or at least avoids the greater harm of losing a limb."
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	"And the sign is that the limb becomes black, as if it had been burnt by fire,"
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	"and after this blackness comes corruption of limb after limb,"
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	"And spreads throughout the body; so hurry to cut it off,"
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	"If it is due to the sting of some venomous creatures such as scorpions, vipers and similar ones,"
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	"if the corruption is at the top of the thigh, cut it off, without letting it come close to the hand."
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	"And if it comes as far as the hand, then cut it off at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;"
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	"And if it reaches the arm, cut it off at the elbow; and if it goes beyond the elbow, that is death."
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	"There are no remedies that can help other than those of great power;"
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	"And the same applies when corruption reaches the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut it off after the next joint;"
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	"And if it comes to the ankle, cut off the whole foot."
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	"And if it reaches the leg, cut off at the knee joint;"
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	"And if it goes above the knee, there is no other option but to let the sick person die."
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	"The manner of cutting off or sewing up the member is that you tie it above and below,"
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	"And extend some assistants one towards the lower tie, and others towards the upper one,"
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	"And cut open the flesh between the two ties with a wide spatula until the bone is exposed;"
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	"then cut it off or sew it up, and place on each side a linen cloth so that the suture does not touch the healthy area,"
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	"And come to the sick person's other wounds and ulcers."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	"And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, cauterize it immediately,"
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	"or put on some constricting powders. Then return to your treatment until it is completed."
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	"Then tie the wounded member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals;"
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	"And I will tell you what happened to one man in sumpter:"
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	"He had a blackness that seemed like being burnt by fire,"
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	"And this corruption first appeared on his foot's big toe and spread to affect the whole foot;"
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	"But when the man saw the corruption, he quickly cut off his foot and was healed."
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	"And some time later the corruption returned to the big toe of his hand, and he came to me,"
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	"I put on things that reflected heat after cleansing his body, but the corruption could not be stopped;"
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	"But he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I refused because I hoped to drive back the material;"
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	"And I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die."
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	"because the man's strength was weak; and he became completely discouraged and returned home,"
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	"And he quickly cut off his hand and was healed."
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	"And I have told you this story only so that others may learn from it what to do if they are ever in need."
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	"Sometimes an ulcer appears in a fleshy area and lasts so long that it attracts many flies;"
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	"And then it becomes round and hollows out, and the flies jump into it and leave the area empty like a vessel."
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	"And the skin that is above it is as thin as delicate silk;"
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	"But it does not go down to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called 'healthy.'"
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	"And is not called a fistula."
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	"But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone inside, then it is called a fistula;"
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	"And the skin is such that you must cut all around it, especially if it is thin like silk;"
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	"And do not be afraid of its corruption."
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	"But if you think that the skin is dangerous and the corruption is not deep,"
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the hide is thick with flesh; thus treat it with an enema:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look if the breast is large and the bowel that comes out has a foul odor
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then apply an Egyptian suppository made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take equal parts of senna, oil, and litharge, and put them in a vessel on the fire
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	Then take some according to your need, and mix it with water and honey
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and insert the suppository into the anus, and close the opening.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	Let the medicine remain there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this as many times as necessary until the breast is softened and the foul odor is gone
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and once anointed with water containing ashes
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present and you take ashes from vine wood and pour water over them
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then strain it and apply it as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	And if the patient cannot tolerate this or if the Egyptian suppository or water containing ashes
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	Then use an enema of water and honey with a little crushed litharge in it
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	Or you may use an enema made from melted honey and wine that has the property to cleanse and wash
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	And when you have done this and are confident that the breast is well cleansed
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	then apply an enema made from those things which cause flesh to form in it
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	Take diaphoretic plaster and make a poultice with rose oil and wine
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or use other medicines and oils of which I have spoken their properties when treating oils
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	And if the opening of the breast is small and the tube for the enema cannot be inserted
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	then dilate it slightly with an iron and insert a tampon soaked in Egyptian ointment
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilicon ointment until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	And if the wound is too wide, then apply a stitch and leave it only for one hour so that the enema can be inserted
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the opening that secretes milk is above, then make an incision somewhat lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the breast is deep, do not let flesh grow in it
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot close the wound underneath as you see it
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	then prepare it in such a way that the breast is directed towards the lowest point where it is.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the breast is deep, do not let flesh grow into it
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot close up underneath as you see it
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	then prepare it in such a way that the breast slopes slightly downward and do not leave any part of the breast protruding
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	Take medicines that strengthen to apply on the breast
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and lay over it one cloth made of linen which covers the whole breast.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then close up tightly around the opening of the breast, about a little larger than the first one
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then apply soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it over the opening of the breast to support the breast and do not remove the large cloth outside until after many days once
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And the one on the opening of the breast is removed often in order to remove the milk.
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	Know what comes out of the breast, whether it is venom or little or enough, whether digested or undigested
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	Take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	And when your treatment has extended in this way and you see that the milk begins to flow from the opening of the breast
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	then know that the breast is beginning to heal and the health is approaching.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then remove it in the morning or on the third day, and when you remove the wound
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	then change another cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the breast continues to secrete undigested milk, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons come out after a long time, do not despair of the health
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health is approaching. For there are men for whom it takes a long time for flesh to grow in their wounds and others who have the opposite condition.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if undigested milk flows from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the breast takes a long time to heal and is prolapsed, apply drying medicines in substance and in power.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	such as diaphoretic ointment, for there is a large part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take diaphoretic ointment, made with rose oil, and rise it with old wine equal in substance
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and this is better cooked until thickened.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When diaphoretic ointments are not available
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, and powder them onto the honey while it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	And then apply a cloth, one draught, to it, and stretch it over the breast; sometimes an astrologer long is administered there
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is also like wheat flour and oatmeal
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And in the case of simple or composite herbs: grind them up, make them into powder, and apply honey as mentioned above
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Then know that the corruption has penetrated deeply, causing pressure on the bone, or in hard members, or in joints
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	If it is a fistula cure, as we said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is a boil that arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or sometimes it appears on other toes
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it is neglected and not taken care of, a large boil forms there
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and spread so much that they reach the root of the nail, sometimes even entirely consuming it
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And the corruption reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain; the skin of the toe is swollen and reddened in color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have described in that section, but the treatment does not help
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	Then you must cut off about a third of the nail with iron tongs, removing all the excess
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is greatly beneficial if the bone and the nail are healthy
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses on the flesh and starts to throb and become inflamed
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then you must put the root of the plantain under the nail where the flesh is pointing
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and bring it upwards, and cut off that tender and delicate flesh gently
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply burning and corrosive medications to the remaining flesh to remove all of it
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply hot fomentations until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption has reached the bone, cut it out and cauterize the wound, for as long as the bone remains corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see that the toe is rotting, then cut it off with iron tongs as described earlier
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it becomes gangrenous and putrid, causing great pain, then you must first cleanse it
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then cut the nail of the big toe with the sharp edge of the scissors across the top
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel great pain
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, apply something to ease the pain
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of gout in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	Some men have toes that are very fatty in their hands
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is bone or even nail present
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some of them grow at the root of the joint or on one of the toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	He who is born with a knot of the two does not move
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and he who is born at the joint of the two sometimes moves
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The waist of one who is fleshly is light in this way
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	waist to its root by a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure, so he should hold onto the cover
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or has a knot in the hind part of the joint, it is necessary to first cut around the flesh up to the bone
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then cure it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sinews that come together at the two joints come by birth, or by the union of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary to cut this union so that the limbs return according to their natural shapes;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	"Then place between two tents or cloths moistened with rosewater oil, so they do not adhere."
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you place between two pieces of thin lead until the joint is well seated, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling occurs on either side with the palm, scrape away this scurf as needed.
Des vils	Of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Wounds are swollen, large blisters filled with melancholic excess matter that come from many parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And they happen more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him a laxative for the colon, and then the holy water of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure with iron is done in two ways: one is to cut it and draw out the black blood from the wound;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to lift the blister and draw out all its contents.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cauterization should be done in this manner: first, raise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the large blood is subtilized;
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then strap the sick leg from above the hip down to below the knee joint;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the blister in one place or two or three with a wide cauterization tool;
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then remove and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's virtue can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then wash it off, and command that they bind him tightly with flesh-colored bandages around his blackened neck;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and begin again the evacuation and cleansing when the vessels are full, for it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevation of the limb is done in this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then place it in a bath and pour hot water over the leg until it turns red and swells the vessels;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, then heat it by the fire, and then wrap it around near the vessel of the long bone at the top of the knee or below at the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin with an awl and strip back the vessel from each side until it becomes apparent when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white thread.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then push the probe underneath until it raises the vessel from the skin, and then pierce it lightly with an awl
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then place a second compress three fingers away from the first one, then strip back the skin over the vessel until it becomes visible
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then raise it with your finger, just as you did before, and pierce it with another awl in the same manner
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then place another compress or several if needed, then raise it again and secure it at the two ends of the foot
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then traction and elevation until you reach the second compress, then extract it compress by compress until it comes out entirely, then secure it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot traction and elevate it, then insert a strong doubled thread needle into the vessel
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and tie it off and traction it, and place your finger underneath, turning your hand back and forth until it comes out entirely.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And be sure that it does not slip away because if it does slip away then you cannot traction or elevate it and harm will come to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have completely extracted it, then place on the wound area wool moistened with wine and rose oil, and let it soak until it is clean.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vessel is contracted, twisted, and coiled together, and not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that you cut it incorrectly, but do not cover it; and draw it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one covers the screw is curved, and it does not cut, so that it covers the thread.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	"If it were thin, it would block the vein, but let it be thick as we have said; this is the form:"
De la voinne civile	Of civil war
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is inserted into legs, warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and in land with no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to rot that originates beneath the skin
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	like when it enters the body like serpents and worms, inserted between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the sign that this vein has begun is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the location changes and the vein begins to emerge from its hiding place, like a plant's root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the flesh opens, you must wrap around it a piece of linen two and a half fingers wide up to two fingers, and knot
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the linen hanging on the leg; whenever blood flows out again, wrap the linen around it and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it's too long, cut off part of it, wrap the remaining piece around it, but do not cut its root until it has all emerged.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh and cause an abscess and rot at that location, leading to a bad illness
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore, it must be treated gradually until its head appears and none remains in the body
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And sometimes this vein is as long as five palms or ten
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and a man once came to me whose vein was twenty palms long; when you cut it, it will gush out one quart or more, and pierce all the way through to its depth
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	until all of it comes out; then empty the matter inside and apply medicine at that location to prevent rot for a few days before treating it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it opens in the ankle of the foot or on the foot itself
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there are many holes from which blood flows; therefore treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Concerning worms that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," because it often occurs among oxen,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	"And there exists a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, traveling up and down throughout the body,"
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	"and it can be felt well as it travels from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes away;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	"And it is caused by putrefaction of certain humours, such as come worms and serpents, and tapeworms, and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	"And its harmfulness is doubted, for when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, it reaches the eye,"
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	"perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; this happens many times."
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	"When you see one being cleaned and drawn out, then one can only perceive it when it moves:"
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	"So it is necessary that you tie the wound above and below with a strong thread, very tightly,"
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	"then cut on top of it and draw it out, and if the worm has burrowed deeply into the flesh and you do not find it,"
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	"then cauterize it with fire until it dies;"
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	"And the greatest harm that it causes is that it blinds the eye, as we have said;"
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	"But if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, press down on the eyebrow tightly below it, then cut above and draw it out;"
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	"And it is necessary to use the remedy of purification of the body with dissolving medicines for putrid humours,"
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	"and beware of eating decaying meats."
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	On the Pain That Comes from Flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	"This disease is called in our land 'wakiir' and is a pain that occurs in certain limbs,"
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	"and then it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you."
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	"I was summoned to see an ill woman, and when I examined her arm, I saw a small swelling in the armpit;"
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	"And shortly afterward, she saw something like a worm rising to the shoulder,"
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	"more quickly than anything else, as if it were quicksilver moving from one place to another;"
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	"The pain moved away from that spot and lodged itself in the shoulder,"
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	"and then shortly thereafter it spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm;"
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	"then she told me that she was continually turning around her body as I saw."
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I was greatly amazed at how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I had never seen this disease manifest itself like this before."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	"Nevertheless, I had often seen pain move from one place to another,"
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	"But I had never seen it like this before, as I saw in this woman;"
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	"And I thought that perhaps this was because the woman had a dry body and exposed armpits,"
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	"and therefore this constrained wind appeared;"
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	"And it is not seen in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and concealed armpits."
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	"And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have described,"
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	"if the skin above and below rises quickly, and then suddenly contracts so much that the constrained wind breaks out at that spot;"
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	"And cauterize the spot; if you don’t see it with your own eyes,"
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	"then treat it as one would treat windy conditions, such as with fetid pills, pills of saffron, and similar remedies."
Des saiettes	"Regarding hiccups:"
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"The causes of hiccups are varied according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	"There are various kinds of hiccups: some have sharp points, others have small ones, some are hairy, and some are smooth;"
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	"and there are those with two angles, those with tongues, and those with fragments;"
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	"And hiccups that occur in any limb do so in one of two ways: either they come from the main limb,"
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	"such as the head, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs."
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	"When hiccups occur in any part of these limbs, and you see the signs of death that I will tell you about later:"
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	"you must beware of extracting this hiccup, for death often follows in many cases;"
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	"And when this bad sign is not apparent and the hiccup is not deep, then treat it and heal the wound."
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	"The sign of hiccups occurring in the head is when they pierce the bone and cause the fontanelle above the brain to bulge out;"
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	"and when there is darkness and dizziness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, inflammation of the tongue and its redness, spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile."
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	"And sometimes there is fluid from the nose or ears; sometimes speech and voice are lost;"
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	"and there suddenly appears moist white flesh resembling that of chickens, and also burning like raw flesh;"
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	"And if this sign is apparent to you, then beware of treating it; extract the hiccup only if it is not inside."
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	"The signs that hiccups occur in the heart are when they are close to the left nipple and feel as if they were stuck in something hard, not empty;"
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	"And sometimes hiccups move like those of chickens, and there is black blood; coldness and cold sweat come on, and syncope occurs;"
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	"then know for certain that death is near."
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"The sign of hiccups that occur near the lung is when foamless sputum suddenly comes from the wound; the throat swells up and the patient changes color, sighs loudly, and seeks cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	"And if hiccups occur in the covering of the stomach, near the ribs, they cause much belching and great pain with sighing; all the members of the shoulders move."
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if hiccups occur in the stomach, sometimes undigested meat comes out from the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if hiccups occur in the belly and blood flows through the intestines suddenly, there is no hope of recovery or extraction of the hiccup."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	"And if hiccups occur in the bladder and urine suddenly comes out with blood, and the patient feels strong pain, know that the wound is mortal."
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"Other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary muscles, spinal column, buttocks, thighs, and legs, etc., are safe according to many conditions."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When hiccups occur in a nerve or artery and are not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do the same."
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	"It happened to one man that hiccups struck him in the arm at the root of his nose;"
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	"I probed it and extracted it on the other side beneath the ear's fat, without causing any harm."
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	"And I extracted one hiccup that struck in the fat of the eye under its membrane,"
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	"and the hiccup was embedded, and I could hardly touch it except for its tip facing towards the wood;"
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	"And the hiccup was as large as an archer's bowstring, easily extracted without causing any pain or harm to the eye; the man recovered and had no bad consequences."
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	"I extracted a hiccup from a Christian's throat; it was large like an Arabian's ear;"
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	"After shaving his beard, I probed carefully and extracted the hiccup; the Christian recovered."
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	"I extracted a hiccup from one man who had it in his belly; I thought he was going to die;"
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	"but after thirty days passed, his condition did not change;"
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	"I cut into the hiccup, extracted it with forceps, and there were no bad consequences."
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	"And once I saw a man whom hiccups struck in the back; the wound had healed on top;"
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	"but the hiccup remained inside him and did not change his natural condition;"
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	"He found no harm in any of his natural works."
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	"I saw another man whom hiccups struck on the face; the wound had healed;"
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	"and it remained inside without causing him great pain; there were many similar cases."
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	"I extracted one hiccup from a man of the king's household who had it in his nose;"
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	"And it was somewhat inclined towards the right side, and the hiccup was completely embedded;"
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	"I was called to treat him three days after he was struck; I found the wound very narrow."
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	"I probed it carefully with a delicate probe but could not feel it;"
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	"And he felt pain and discomfort under his right ear."
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	"I thought that it was due to the tip of the hiccup;"
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	"So I applied an attracting plaster on the spot so that the wound would not swell;"
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	"And then the hiccup's head appeared."
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	"I applied the plaster for several days until the wound healed again; the sick man remained thus for a long time;"
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	Until he feels the arrowhead for one day inside his flesh; and he tells you this
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied hot corrosive medication to the wound several times until it healed completely
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I felt around and found the tip of the arrowhead sticking out;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied this hot medication to the wound opening until the tip of the arrowhead was clearly visible
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and the healing continued well for four months
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	but then I tore open the wound so that I could insert forceps and pull from both sides, but it would not come out
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	so then I kept experimenting with different methods using various tools until finally, one day, I grabbed it successfully with well-made forceps
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what is described at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it out and close the wound
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	so I closed it up again, and the wound healed completely, and the patient was entirely cured
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	I have told you about the extraction of some arrowheads,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	"Therefore you should rely on what I do not mention, as books cannot cover everything."
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	"But wise teachers compare a few things carefully, including what is present and missing."
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	True work, and nine instruments are needed for the extraction of foreign bodies occurring in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that splinters exit from the limbs where they are inserted only in two ways
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they entered,
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	"and that which jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering flesh, and sometimes jumps out now."
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	"And if it does not jump out now, let it remain until the wound around it closes up, then the joint will be released."
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	"And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain like this for a few days, moving it each day."
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	"and then it will jump out; and if it does not jump out, bore all around with a fine needle until the place is widened, then pull it."
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	"And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bone at the top and reaches one of the ventricles of the brain,"
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	"do not pull it out but let it remain until it is healed after a few days,"
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrowhead comes to the brain, it's fatal."
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	"And if the arrowhead is only stuck in the bone and does not reach the brain,"
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	"and after a few days without any bad accident happening to him, prepare to pull it out."
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it is very deeply stuck and cannot come out, then apply poultices around it as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed."
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	"And if the arrowhead is buried in the flesh so that one cannot see it, search for it by touch all around;"
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	"and if you feel it, pull it out with some suitable instrument."
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	"And if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead,"
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	"then cut until the wound is large enough."
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	"And pull out the arrowhead if you can, and if there are barbs on it that hold it in place,"
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	"then cut off the flesh that is stuck into it from two sides as much as you can,"
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	"and then break or bend the barbs of the arrowhead so that you can pull it out."
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	"And be careful not to break the arrowhead while pulling it out, so as not to cause more pain."
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	"And if you cannot do it all at once, leave the arrowhead until the wound around it is healed, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier."
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	"And if bleeding makes you faint, apply the treatments that we have described in our chapter on wounds."
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	"and beware of cutting into nerves and veins, and devise how you can pull out the arrowhead without danger."
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	"Soon or late, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him,"
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	"for that is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do it, place him according to the signs that indicate to you how."
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	"The arrowhead that sticks out on the other side and shows through can be pulled out easily,"
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut then until the forceps can grasp it, and then pull it out; if now it is burning.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, twist your hand round until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then resume traction until it comes out completely;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the pin of the splint is there, remove the splint from the entire bone
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the bone falls and you see that reduction must be applied, then apply one traction device
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the splint enters into the socket of the traction device; and then pull it out
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the splint is stuck in place, insert one pointed traction device inside to aid with traction
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the splint has been cut, then you must cut all the flesh around where the veins are, if you can
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then dress the wound as it should be dressed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the splint falls on or near the bladder or the belly or the ribs and it is close by and you can cut it off, then do so
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein or the nerve, then pull it out and then sew up the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and care for it until it is healed
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat splints is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the butt end is also like that of a bird's feather
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to attach to the tip of the arrowhead, as shown here is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the pliers for attaching and removing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common flesh
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins that drain are 31, from which there are 16 at the head,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	It is to know: two bat-like structures located after the ears, called the temples "herbich".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two visible temples.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins located on either side of each eye called "aspirates".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that runs across the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two tendons located on the neck
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the upper lip of the mouth, which are called "augeherich".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	And there are two veins beneath the tongue
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The common veins in each arm are five in number
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One of these is the cephalic vein, which runs along the right side of the chest and is commonly called "the vein of the head" by laypeople
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the median vein is called "fasta", composed of the cephalic and basilica veins
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and it is commonly called "the heart vein" by laypeople, while the basilica runs along the left side
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it the abdominal vein, which is above the forearm bone
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	It is also called the anterior interosseous vein, which is clearly visible in the forearm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	The savatella vein is located between the little finger and the ring finger on both sides
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	In the leg and foot, there are three veins:
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second sphenoid bone, which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And there are three veins underneath those on the other leg
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The sacredness of the veins that are behind the ears helps against old catarrhs and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of the sanctity, as I told you, are such that you should raise the head of the patient
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	Then rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strap the patient's neck with a vise
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent places on the head
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Then grasp them with your two fingers and where you feel the pulse beneath your fingers, then squeeze firmly
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet, and thrust it under the vein up to the bone; then lift your hand all along the upstream vein
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut through skin and vein well with two fingers across, and let out blood until you see it
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then bind and tie it, until it is stanched
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The sanctity of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good against old migraines
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and soda, and customary ophthalmia, and to the course of tears gone astray in the eyes
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the qualities of the sanctity are such as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	And it is that the patient straps their neck so that the two veins appear clearly
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse beneath your fingers and then squeeze firmly
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the skin upwards on the vein with your index finger, and thrust the lancet underneath
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift up the vein and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let out blood according to your necessity
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then untie the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then tie it firmly and leave it until it is stanched. And we have already spoken about their cutting and extracting in the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The sanctity of the frontal vein is just as valuable as that of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, migraines, and redness
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck until the veins appear
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "the fossor," of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let out blood according to the quantity that you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then untie the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is stanched, sometimes with a wide flame
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not necessary for the bandages to be too tight; and tie them diagonally, because the bone is nearby, and by chance the bandage may break if it is too thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The sanctity of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with the eyes and with dizziness, redness, inflammation of the eye, and diseases of the face
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck with any kind of tie, as before
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then sanctify it and make the sanctity diagonal, somewhat long and somewhat wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the bandage is too thin, it may break. Then let out blood according to your necessity and then tie on cotton, tying it tightly
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The sanctity of the nasal vein is beneficial for ague, frenzied soda, and diseases of the face
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	especially for migraines and redness that come in the face, particularly when they are old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck and then holds their nose with your left hand
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a thin long bandage and insert it between the two nostrils in the space that is between them
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the vein does not appear well here, and blood will begin to flow now
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let out blood according to your necessity, then tie it for one night because it is very quickly restored
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the shape of the bandage:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The sanctity of the two large veins helps with the stretching of the small intestine, the beginning of worms, and many diseases, and with eczema, corrosion, herpetic infections, and eruptions
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And its qualities are such that the patient twists their neck on both sides, as we have said
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master be standing on the head of the patient and the patient sit on a chair
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then sanctify the vein lengthwise somewhat widely and then let out blood temperately or according to necessity
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then repeat on the other vein and untie the tie and press gently between the veins
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle themselves. Leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	On the sanctity of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sanctity of the veins above the lips helps with coughing in the mouth and with gum corrosion, lip fissures, nosebleeds, and around the nostrils
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And its qualities are such that you make the patient sit in front of you and twist their neck as I have said
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip and look for two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the leftlip
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and recognize them by their black color and by the small dark veins around them
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	then sanctify both of them if you cannot recognize them or if you are unsure
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	"Cut off the thickest one from each side,
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the characteristics of the veins are that the patient should raise his hands before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look beneath on each side for a black vein
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Then heal one and the other, but do not go too deep, because below are the arteries
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the arm which are commonly treated are healed in two ways
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by pricking with one flame of myrtle or olive oil subtly as with a narrow sword, and it is called "aneasile"
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide or thin according to the width and narrowing of the veins
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the myrtle flame is very well-known, and it is wide as you see
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood in order to release thick and turbid blood
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive flame
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed and is for healing thin veins that contain clear yellow blood
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are beneath the throat, neck, cheek, and belly
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the physician to heal it carefully, and to beware of the artery that lies below it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow copiously, then he should press upon it as I have said
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be pointed but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open up clearly, then it is necessary for you to draw it out and change to another one
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or any vein that you want from it, or you heal in its place the vein in the arm: it opens up clearly
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut with the flame called "anesile" as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place for healing, then it is also necessary that you draw out the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place with incense and then bind the arm and cut the vein with the flame called "anesile"
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the place swell up, for it is of the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see something come out above like urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then quickly place your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which happens many times
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it yourself nor let the sick person move it until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped and you faint, and there is no physician present, then cut the artery if it is open for the sake of the head; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a fig leaf, slit it open, and take one half and bind it well until the next day
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; if not, then heal it as we have said with powders that stop bleeding
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and stopping the bleeding is not important in many cases for a small wound and the strength of the binding on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The healing of the vein in the middle helps to draw blood from the head above and the body below,
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	Because it is composed of basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the surgeon must warn himself about the nerve that is underneath, and if it is not too deep, he finds the nerve
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and he inflates [the joint] and the patient suffers injury, and perhaps cannot recover
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	This nerve opens up very often, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the anesthesia tool; and follow the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is space between the two nerves, make an incision along it
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The surgery of the cephalic [bone] helps to draw blood from the head, and aids healing as well
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and one must operate by gripping the olive-shaped or mirt-shaped flame, for that is the safest of all the spaces because it does not have any nerve or artery underneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one should try to find the easiest place [to operate], and do not harm anything if one fails at first; then one can begin again
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps the site may swell in some people when it is operated upon incorrectly at first, but it does no harm
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the surgery depends on your skill.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about surgery is that it was invented only to preserve health
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future illnesses
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let surgery be done in one of the three spaces that are found there: namely, the cephalic, the fastigium, and the basilar
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should operate at the beginning of springtime, and in autumn and winter after meals, when the sign ofpletion appears
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should operate on the first or third day, after two or three hours from dawn.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The surgery that is performed for illnesses has no fixed time; but when there is need of it, it can be done at any hour and at all times
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one should not operate on children under fourteen years old, nor on women during the first four months of pregnancy up to seven months
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should one operate on the elderly who have passed sixty years of age
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to undergo surgery in any way, they should cleanse their bowels with a light suppository
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw the impurities from the intestines to harm the main members
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one operate on those who are too fond of meat, nor those who are drunk at that time, nor dropsical people
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and one should avoid operating after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, menstruation in women, hard labor, excessive vigilance or fasting, and those who are completely without virtue, or who have been struck by a weapon or disease
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then refine the humors if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks and medications, if you are able to do so
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then take a bath if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and operate in the space around the third rib on the side of the chest, as we have said
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and on that day avoid work, food, and sexual intercourse, etc.;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be calm and cheerful, and let the surgeon be taller than the patient, and let them wipe their hands twice or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then strain the linen moderately above, for when it is too tight or short, blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the joint with both hands until you can feel the veins swell under them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then let him moisten the flame of a small piece of old oil with water, then place his left hand's thumb on that vein below where he wishes to cauterize.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Ensure that the vein does not bulge or swell when cauterizing.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	Because there are veins that flee like cords to the sinew, and there are some that are full of windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Therefore, when one places heat on it, it retreats from the heat and cannot open the vein; thus are some of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	But if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore the surgeon must be skilled in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first try, that is good; but if not, then restart a little lower or higher, as long as the area is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is inflamed and the patient is afraid, let it be for one or two days without tying the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	for perhaps some swelling will come about; do not enter into a bath, then restart the surgery if he wishes.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the opening is small or the skin covers it finely and you doubt that there is not much blood issuing from it, then apply all the heat directly to that opening itself;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and open it quickly before the area becomes inflamed; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area becoming inflamed, do not restart the surgery and apply a little oil mixed with lye, for it lightens the body's blood and is gentle in this place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the oil-and-lye mixture in every surgery that you perform on veins to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this same remedy makes thrice and bowels of those who place it on the area; for it subtly draws out the blood and disperses it when it is too abundant.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if a large swelling comes about, which happens often, especially when the vein is not opened far enough during that first attempt where the opening of the vein was small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	then hurry and apply a sponge moistened in warm water mixed with salt to the area, and leave it on for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the blood has issued from the vein, and if there remains afterward some blackness or greenness on the area for a few days, it will not harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see that there is still something remaining, apply something of aloe or myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is swelling and appearance of inflammation at the time of surgery like that of the basilisk: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to apply any of the remedies we have mentioned, for perhaps blood would flow from the artery; but instead make one dry dressing to harden the area, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw off blood according to its quantity and according to its color.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thinned; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And he who is full and fat, and has need of bloodletting, should have a larger wound made for him, and the opening should be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and he who is weak should have the opposite done to him: let him be bled but little and often, and he must be bled in cutting across, not in pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bloodletting saves from loss of blood and injury to nerves, and is better than that done with a long or wide incision.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to him whose body fails during bloodletting, it is necessary to give bread moistened in juice of pomegranates; if he is overheated, let him have blood drawn three or four times
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of cold temperament, let him eat before bloodletting bread moistened in musk syrup or in spiced honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he faints during bloodletting after much blood has flowed, it is necessary that he inhale broth of meat and a subtle, fragrant syrup
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other remedies that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to empty the arm vein and be bled again later, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bloodletting, he be bled little by little according to his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to empty the arm vein after the first bloodletting and has a strong body, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to have blood drawn from another vein should be bled on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood in the body that has already been heated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw off a great quantity of it and widen the opening so that it flows freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then when you have completed all the conditions for bloodletting and placed your hand on the pulse while bleeding, make sure that the mouth does not come in place of the opening
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often if the bloodletter is careless.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And do not do this when you see that the arm has been untied and blood is flowing for the second time, and if the opening is closed, then press strongly upon it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, let him straighten his arm quickly, for that would be bad
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it flow until he bleeds the second time; or prick at the point of the opening until the frozen blood from the vein's mouth flows out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	And apply a little salt mixed with water and press gently upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not squeeze it until the inflammation has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a necessity to draw blood a second time, do so in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are bled in place of the head vein because they are connected.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand into warm water until the veins become red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let it be tied moderately so that the veins appear well, then bleed now across, not widely or deeply;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the opening be wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand; and if blood cannot flow out, put the hand back into warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in summer, do not put the hand back into warm water, for one puts it there more often in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from any other veins, because neither artery nor nerve is present there.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	Bloodletting from the vein of the little finger of the right hand is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it should be done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Stretch out the hand, and put it into warm water until the vein becomes swollen so that one can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and bleed across, and if you cut all around it, nothing will be harmed.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not go too deep, because the nerves are located underneath all the flesh
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	"Then immerse the hand in warm water if the blood is congealed in the wound, so that it may flow out."
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And once you have cleaned off as much blood as necessary, then place a bandage of oil and flax to quickly bind the wound, and do this for each wound."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The swelling in the left hand is attributed to mouse disease, so perform the same treatment as I have instructed for the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	"The application of heat cautery is beneficial for all illnesses located beneath the body."
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	"such as diseases of the uterus, retention of urine, disease of the spine, and old diseases of the thighs and legs, and similar illnesses."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	"And the quality of its cautery is that the patient puts their foot in warm water, and rubs the wound until it reddens,"
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	"and then places it on the ankle joint; and the wound is located at the ankle, and many veins run from there up into the foot;"
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	"therefore cauterize either the larger vein or at the ankle, whichever is more beneficial."
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	"And if you cauterize on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath it, and make the cautery like a cut; and let the flame be gentle."
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in the water and allow the vein to drain well."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	"And if cauterization does not succeed on the first try, begin again a little higher up the second time, for the place is tender;"
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	"do not fear damaging nerves, as we have said, and do likewise for the other foot if necessary."
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The location of the sciatic vein is at the outer ankle joint, and its cauterization benefits sciatica pain when it is due to hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	"And the method of its cauterization is that the patient enters a bath and then applies four cautery marks on the outer ankle while twisting;"
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	"for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then cauterize in any way you can, even by cutting across it."
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	"And it is better that you cut it, for the location is safe and the vein is very common in many people."
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	"And if you cannot find it, then cauterize any vein that opens on the back of the foot near the little toe, but beware of nerves."
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	"And keep bleeding until you see blood flowing, then untie the bandage, and apply cotton and tie it securely; now it is cauterized."
Des sainies de ventouse	"On cupping (ventouse)"
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	"Cupping vessels are made of horn, or earthenware, or glass; and cupping is performed in two ways: either by pricking to attract blood, or without pricking."
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	"And this cupping without pricking is done in two ways: either with fire (heated cups) or without fire (cold cups)."
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	"And cupping performed by pricking and extracting blood is done in fourteen locations on the body,"
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	"of which one is entirely on the head, and another is on the neck;"
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	"And two others are located on each side of the neck; and the cupping vessel under the chin."
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	"And cupping vessels are placed on the shoulders and over the ribs."
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	"And cups are placed on both arms, and on both legs."
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	"And the cupping glasses of two cheeks; and cupping does not draw blood, except from small veins scattered throughout the flesh."
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	"Therefore it does not weaken anyone, as is done with bleeding from veins;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	"And it should not be administered, neither in all cases nor without fire and without heat, in any disease that arises from excess, until the whole body is emptied."
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	"And if it becomes necessary to cup due to illness or by custom, we will administer it each hour at the beginning of the month or at the end, and in-between and at all times."
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	"For there are people who, when they need to be cupped, have heavy heads;"
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	"And others find that they suffer from excess and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness before the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	"And those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have an enlarged tongue, and cough up blood;"
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	"And there are some who dream, seeing much blood and wounds and dead people, and things of that nature."
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	"And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we order cupping to be performed after three hours of the day."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	"The bleeding of the temple helps against headache ... that afflicts them, but it should not be done after evacuation of the whole body."
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	"And this cupping is in lieu of bloodletting from the temple,"
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	"and those of cold temperament or with phlegm should not use it, for it harms them greatly;"
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	"And therefore old people and those who have cold conditions in their heads should not use it."
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, so one must place the cupping vessel a little lower down to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	"Cupping on the neck is in lieu of bloodletting from the head and nape of the neck, and therefore it is especially beneficial for throat inflammation;"
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	"And it helps with breaking up the phlegm channel, cough, and excess;"
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	"and it should not be placed too tightly, for if it holds too firmly it can cause forgetfulness or harm to the stomach or heart."
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	"Cupping on both sides of the neck is beneficial for headaches, optic pain, migraines, strangulation, and toothache;"
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	"and it is in lieu of bloodletting from the nape of the neck; and you should tell the practitioner to press gently when placing it, so that he does not cut the artery or cause profuse bleeding."
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	"Cupping under the chin is beneficial for mouth diseases, gum inflammation, and similar conditions that are in the mouth; it is in lieu of bloodletting from both lips."
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"Cupping on the shoulders is beneficial for illnesses that come from heat and excess;"
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	"Cupping on the ribs is as effective as cupping with three hollows of the arm;"
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	"for it attracts blood from these large vessels;"
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	"And tell the practitioner not to place it too deeply, for the area is thin and has nerves and arteries underneath."
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	"A cupping vessel placed on the buttock is beneficial for hemorrhoids and lower abdomen diseases. The vessel should be large and made of brass to draw well; if it were too thin, it might break and cause large wounds."
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	"Cupping on the legs draws openly, for it attracts blood from the whole body and is beneficial for old back pains, sciatica, bladder inflammation, and it strengthens the flesh. It is in lieu of the two sophenes (groin muscles) and the two ankles, but it can also weaken the body with prolonged use and cause edema in various conditions."
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	"The method of applying the cupping vessel is as follows: first place it empty and suck gently but steadily. Then apply it quickly and move it evenly until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the skin becomes flushed. Then remove it and replace the vessels. Be cautious about the condition of the body, for some people have thin flesh and clear pores; in this case, one should strike only once and make wide but not too deep wounds. Suck gently."
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	"If the blood is thick, then one must strike twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood."
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	"And if the blood is very dense, one must strike a third time. But if we wish to draw only a little blood, once will suffice."
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	"And if we wish to draw much blood, then strike repeatedly. If the blood is dense, strike deeply, and the endpoint is when the heart is pierced suddenly;"
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	"And those with thick and hard skin and narrow pores should oil the area of the cupping vessels with aperitive and solvent oil:"
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	"If it is in summer, use violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;"
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	"And if it is winter, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or similar."
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	"And if the excess blood is thick and cold, use myrrh oil, balsam oil, fennel oil, or similar."
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	"And those with tender flesh and wide pores should not use any oil;"
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	"but they should wash the area after cupping with rosewater, cold water, blackberry juice, pumpkin juice, or other similar substances."
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	"And those with excessive moisture should rise using hyssop water, myrtle water, sumac water, or similar substances."
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	"And those with thick excesses should rise using old wine, vinegar water, fennel or chamomile decoction, or similar substances;"
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	"But do not perform cupping before bathing or in the bath. It should be done one or two hours after bathing, and one should not sleep immediately afterwards;"
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	"And one must ensure that they are warm when being cupped and have cupping performed."
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	"Be cautious with those who are choleric and have thick, fiery blood;"
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	"They should consume cold substances such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with hyssop, and similar foods;"
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	"And eat chickpeas, castrated male lamb meat, and moist meats."
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	"And those with cold complexion should consume honey syrup and moderate aromatic wine that is between old and new. They should eat little, and consume chickpeas, small birds, and pigeons."
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	"On the day they are cupped, they should drink more than they eat;"
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	"And sometimes give men triacle or musk before or after cupping to strengthen the main organs;"
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	"Thin out the blood, but those who are hot should not drink it."
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	"The cupping vessels placed without striking are those applied to the liver, spleen, stomach, podagra (gout), abdomen, back, and buttocks, as these areas do not tolerate being struck."
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	"And this is only done to attract blood from one area to another;"
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	"for example, we place them on the breasts when there is milk congestion to draw out the viscosity from that area. Similarly, we apply cupping vessels to the abdomen and back to reduce the size of those areas."
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	"And relieves pain when there is retention or stone, so relieves by its attractive power perhaps the retention, or dislodges the stone from its place."
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	"And thus it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind."
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cups are administered empty for merely sucking; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of warm water
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	like in the case of diseases of the pleura, and in such manner that one fills the cup with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of administering the cupping glass with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two digits wide and half a palm deep, and have on its circumference around the middle one small hole, just like for putting in a needle
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be of earthenware, smooth beforehand so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in its middle a crossbar of earthenware or iron for placing an incense candle
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cups for children are different from those for adults, and those for thin people are different from those for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus place this cup on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	place the lit candle or one wick of flax into the cup through the crossbar that is inside the cup
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup and does not burn the patient
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, with both hands over the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to remove it, steam comes out and the cup is removed
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take away the wick as before, and repeat this often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	Therefore, in the cupping glass used for diseases of the pleura, there is no crossbar or hole, and it is not administered with fire except when it is full of water. It is placed on the limb alone.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Suction cups are not applied except in limbs where it is impossible to place them due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in places devoid of flesh, like the knees or toes, and other similar places.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	"and the qualities of urine are such that when you find it without sediment which are in clear sweet waters without corruption, then take it."
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	"And put them in fresh water until they become accustomed [to their surroundings], and have nothing in their bellies;"
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	"Then let there be a letting of blood and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply warm compresses."
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	"And once they are full [with blood], if they fall out and it is a place where cupping can be applied, apply the cupping glass, for this is very helpful."
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not so, then raise the joint gently, then with water, very well, and then compress it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	If the joint swells too much after the body of the shoulder blade, then soak one linen cloth in cold water and apply it until the swelling is reduced.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	If the swelling increases, apply ground vitriol or salt or similar substances until it subsides;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Alternatively, place half a handful of peeled fava beans on the joint and leave them there until they heat up; this will now stop the swelling.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more, take other shoulder blades.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	If the shoulder blades do not stick, rub fresh blood on the joint and insert a needle there until the shoulder blade comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	Then apply them, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are attached, sprinkle a little powder of ground aloe and salt or ash on them so that they will stick firmly.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and provides treatment for broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians neglect this chapter, having never seen any of the ancient books or read a single letter from them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, knowledge is lacking in our land, because I never found anyone skilled in it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	"And I know nothing except through the wisdom of old books which I have studied so much that I have treated their knowledge, and through experience, and through the habit of my life."
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	"And I have already described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the shapes of the tools that are arranged, as I did in these two preceding chapters."
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and chapters where the wise places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are tried may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	"I say that when a breakage or dislocation or torsion or fracture comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick on one side and the other, if nothing prevents you from doing so, such as weakness of body, or childhood, or old age."
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	"or if the time is not very warm or too cold; and avoid eating cold things, that is to say cold foods, and poultry and venison, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have some doubt about an inflamed boil, or an expansion of matter in the limb; then the sick person should return to their usual regimen."
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the sick person with foods that promote growth and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, and veal, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things, and strong wine."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment the wound will close more quickly and completely."
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	"And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well restored nor healed according to their nature due to weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children."
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	"But do not hesitate to bind around the broken bone a thick cloth that fits and joins the limb together until it becomes strong again; and do not remove the splint too soon, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish them with fatty foods as we have said."
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that breaks are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For a break of the head is different from a break of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways that bones can break."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"For there are breaks that happen suddenly, and others that occur gradually, such as when cutting a feather to make a writing pen."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there is also breakage with wounding, and breaking with just a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	"And each type of break has its own method and appropriate tool for restoration, according to where the memory comes into play;"
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	"And a bone break is recognized by the twisted appearance of the site, and it is evident upon examination, and sounds hollow when pressed with the hand."
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	"And when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the sick person does not feel much pain, then there is no break."
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	"But it can still have twisting, cracking, or a small fracture."
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move the limb by hand, but apply the medications that come later and then gently immobilize it."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	"And know that sudden breaks where the two parts are separated must be aligned equally before any inflammation appears;"
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	"and if inflammation does appear, allow it a few days to settle down until the inflammation is calmed;"
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	"then align the limb gently and straight, and know that this restoration is easier than those where there are pieces missing; then immobilize it as explained later."
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	"And if the bone has pieces broken off, then extend it from two points, whether it is an arm or leg, or use your hand for smaller limbs, or use two cords or one cord and your hand;"
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	"and align the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts are separated, carefully fit the pieces back together using all your skill without causing injury or pain to the sick person;"
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	"And join the two ends of the bone together in the best alignment."
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	"And you can feel with your hand whether it is well aligned or not: if not, realign it carefully and do not immobilize too tightly nor press in such a way that heat and stiffness are caused in the limb due to poor technique, as we have said many times before."
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	"And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient to keep it still while awake or asleep, turning or in any other way;"
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	"and make sure that the limb is secured so that the patient feels no pain."
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	"For if there is any pain, then it is not properly aligned, and the limb must be positioned differently so that there is no pain;"
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	"And make sure that it is properly aligned so that no twisting occurs during healing."
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	"The quality of the bone fracture depends on what I have told you."
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that broken limbs are diverse in size, shape, and thickness."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	"There are small members such as arms and legs and similar ones: they should be wrapped with soft and fine linen bandages;"
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	"And those that are thick, such as thighs and legs, should be wrapped with wide and strong linen; for wide linen embraces the whole limb equally and immobilizes it without causing any indentation."
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	"Then wrap it with light bandages, three or four turns according to the limb size, and tighten your hand a little around all the linen; then go above the fracture and tie less tightly so that the fracture can move a little;"
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	"and loosen the linen a bit and a bit until you grasp most of the healthy area; then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area;"
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	"then go back to the area below the fracture and tie it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first section;"
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	"then place linen bandages or cloth between the layers of linen until it is all even; then tie everything together with one bandage from above, and then place your well-made splints on top if there is no inflammation or swelling."
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	"And if there is inflammation or heat, apply something cooling and anti-inflammatory, and let it be like that for a few days;"
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	"then immobilize your splints and make them half the width of a thick reed or use wood for fence posts or palm ribs, cut to this shape:"
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	"But the splint placed over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others;"
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	"And it should also be long enough to suit the size of the limb."
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	"Then tie everything together again as you did in the first layer; then wrap it with thread in the same way as in the first layer over the fracture."
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	"Tie it tighter above and looser below; make sure that the thread is medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;"
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	If the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their knots with twisted linen cords, this is a great error; for the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two inches between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	If the patient is injured by the edges of the stakes after stretching in safe places, then place pads of linen or woolen gauze beneath them so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When a wound is accompanied by fracture and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to stretch all broken limbs with stakes on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	Since limbs are large, do not place hot irons on them except after five or six days, or more according to your certainty of the heat of the inflammation occurring.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the manner of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of eggs; place this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, on the area where you will use it. This is the common way to make a plaster for restoring fractures in various conditions, especially for women and young children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and torsions: Take bdellium, ladanum, lavender, asafetida, gum arabic, and mastic powder (each .x. ounces); myrrh and aloes (each .v. ounces); and aloe wood (.viiij. ounces). Grind these into a fine powder and mix it with plenty of eggs. If the person's constitution is hot, use this plaster because it has a good composition and quickly heals broken bones; useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to make plaster that is useful for sprains: Take mastic and vitriol (each .x. ounces); myrrh and aloes (each .viiij. ounces); gum acacia (.vi. ounces); and bolic armenic (.x. ounces). Grind these ingredients well, then mix with water or plenty of eggs, and apply the mixture.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to make plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their sockets, to relieve pain and reduce swelling, and to heal fractures: Take new linen, moisten it in warm water mixed with hot oil, and place it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore, but it is good for relieving heat from inflammation and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to reset broken bones: Take dry fig leaves, and leaves of earth dock, grind together, make poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of poultice for the setting of broken bones and to facilitate the removal of bruises. Take root of mallow, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, mix with coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of poultice stronger than the first one for setting broken bones with hard bruises. Take roots of mallow, linseed, almond, melilot, and comfrey, violet flowers and camomile flowers, each one part; grind and mix with salt water or fresh water or with wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not apply anything to the broken limb for setting besides wax and oil ointment, and nothing else more. He also says that it should be of medium consistency, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen believes that one should apply dry and slightly warm things to the broken limb for setting, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another poultice recipe for wounds and pain: Take mugwort and chopped horsehair or chicken feathers, mallow, and grind them equally. Make a poultice with the resulting mixture and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	Then remove the poultice after a while, being careful that the patient does not feel any pain and that the bone has not moved from its place. Do not remove it for too many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching comes to the place, with restlessness or swelling, be quick to remove the poultice and poultice remover. Take a light cloth, damp sea sponge, dip it in water and wipe the place until the itching stops and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	"Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place on it a dry linen cloth soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of a hot abscess."
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be relieved, then resume the gentle binding, adding a little poultice, but do not bind it as tightly as before; continue gently until it is healed."
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	"And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and there is pain and swelling, then you must resume binding it with poultice, just as you did initially."
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	"And if the limb does not improve with what we have said, do not untie it until after three days or four, five, or seven days; sometimes leave it tied for twenty days, according to how one sees that the fracture has healed and that the union of flesh is approaching."
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	"Then bind it more tightly than before, and the flesh will grow thicker, as I said earlier. But if you see that the area is drying out excessively, know that healing cannot occur there."
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	"Then apply warm water compresses every time you untie it, and do this every third day, loosening the bandage a little."
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	"Thus the healing of the limb is encouraged by this treatment, and quickly remedies what foolish physicians do, who reset a limb incorrectly. This is wicked, and such practices are weak; I see no other way than to leave it alone and operate correctly."
des diverses manieres de brisure	"Concerning the different kinds of fractures"
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	"There are many ways that bones can be fractured, with diverse appearances, and their causes are distinct."
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	"Some fractures are caused by a blow from a sword, which cuts through the bone all the way to its marrow, like splitting wood. This type of fracture is called 'haichure'."
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword strikes the bone without piercing it, that manner of fracture is called "absolute," and wounds from these two fractures are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	"And if there is an embedded fracture, or a break from falling on stones, or from stones falling, or from similar causes."
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	"And if there is an open fracture that approaches the bone marrow, whether it is below or above the bone, this wound is either large or small."
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	"And if there is a wound that enters the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, it is called this type of break 'capillary'."
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	"And if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling or similar actions and causes the bone fragment to move downward, like when smiths hammer metal on their anvil, then the stones get inside."
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	"And this occurs more frequently in those who have moist skull bones, such as children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	"and occurs with all types of fractures where small fragments are disconnected like stars; I will speak about them in their place."
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	"And we recognize all kinds of fractures through direct examination and probing and by the corrupt flesh on top."
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	"The capillary appearance is recognized by this: when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with vinegar, the fracture becomes black."
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	"In treating a fracture, beware of accidents that may occur in illness. If you see no bad accident such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension and paleness, feverish chill, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions in many ways, he cannot be cured without doubt."
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	"And if you see no frightening accident and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment."
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	"And when the injured person first comes to you and it is wintertime, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can."
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	"And if it is in summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh under the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we mentioned do not occur."
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	"And if the fracture of the bone reaches to the skin that covers the brain, then you must cut open the broken part in this way: take hold of the head of the injured person and uncover as much of the bone as possible around the wound and on the figure of the wound gently."
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	"And if blood flows out when the bone is uncovered or there is a hot abscess, then apply whatever aid is necessary and fill the space with cloths moistened in rose oil."
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	"And let the wound rest until the hot abscess is appeased and you are sure that there is no more bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone in two ways of working: one way is to cut narrowly ahead with a chisel, like this:"
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	"And then I place another chisel larger than the first."
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	"And the second way is to have many chisels of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made of iron. Work lightly so that you do not wound the head."
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	"And if the bone is hard and strong, you must pierce around it before administering chisels with drills, making sure that they do not go too deep and stick out through the bone of the skull. The drill points should have a margin or circle on top to prevent them from sticking out through the bone. You should have many such drills so that each one fits in its proper place around the skull. Here are three ways of drilling:"
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	"The qualities for drilling around the broken bone are to place one drill on the bone and turn with both hands until you feel that the bone is pierced. Then move the drill a little further along and do this all around. Then cut away the space between the holes with chisels, doing so carefully and gently as we have said, until you can remove the bone by hand or with some tool such as forceps or tweezers. Be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord."
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	"And when you have drilled and removed the bone, then you must smooth down any roughness left by the bone using some tool that resembles a chisel but is thinner and more delicate than other chisels."
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	"And if any small bones or chips remain, remove them lightly with some tool. Then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said."
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	"And another way of working is that which Galien describes, which is safer. He praises it greatly and says this:"
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	"It is necessary first to uncover part of the bone where the fracture appears more. Then you will place beneath the head of this lenticular chisel, of which this is the shape:"
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	"And do not cut on one side only, but make the cutting edge acute on both sides so that the cutting is towards the bone. Then strike gently with a small hammer so that you cut the bone all around, taking care not to injure the flesh beneath."
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	"If it is close to the bone, then remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm and without fear."
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach to the skin and the bone is cut only on top with small pieces, then smooth down that roughness and remove the chips with a fine razor, of which you should have many different sizes to use in each place according to the work and the shape of the fracture."
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	"So use larger razors first and then finer ones, continuing until it is all smooth."
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	"In each of the other kinds of hairline fractures and subtle breaks, you must use tools according to their direction. This is something that cannot be answered by someone who has not studied this art."
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	"And if the spinal cord is exposed, then take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound and moist it in rose oil, then place it on the wound."
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	"Then take another piece of linen doubled over once or twice, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth. Do this gently so as not to injure the spinal cord, then apply another bandage on top without binding it too tightly."
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	"And leave it like this for one or two days until the inflammation has subsided. Then remove it and apply medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aloe, and similar substances. Make a powder of these things and place it on the wound, then apply soft ointments without irritating them."
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	"And be sure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment or allow anything to stick to it. For when something sticks to the skin of the brain, it will rot and cause great harm to the patient, as anything placed on the spinal cord will necrose."
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	"So beware, then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and be doubtful without doubting too much."
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	"And if blackening appears on the outside due to the medicine applied, then take one part honey and three parts rose oil and stick a piece of linen dipped in it onto the spinal cord."
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, apply the methods of treatment as needed until healing occurs.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken or only one, because there are two bones; and the lower one is cartilage and does not break unless it is hit or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger or the tip of your nose and put it on that break evenly with your index finger from outside so that the nose regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	"And do this gently, ensuring the patient feels no pain from your work."
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	"If the fracture is in the upper part near the elbow and the forearm cannot return to its place, then you must align it with the head of a splint that is somewhat thick."
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	"And if the fracture is in two parts, do likewise and rush to reset it on the first day, if you can;"
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not [treatment by fire cautery], after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling is appeased,
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you set one bone against another, if there is a fracture there; and let the splints be so thick that they fill the holes of the joint.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some physicians say that one must grease the splints with butter and change them every day. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary to grease them in a mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the splint until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they place goose feathers in the place of tents, and with one soft cloth wrapped around it, if it breaks, then let the patient blow through it; now do as you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if gangrene comes nearby while you are working on it, then put cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or a little bit of diacalcic on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if gangrene does not come nearby, then place a poultice on it from the front, made of sesame flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light dressings over it and do not bind tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the dislocation of the hand is small and it is broken into little pieces, then extract with suitable instruments for this purpose, then stitch the break, and care for it like other joint injuries, applying appropriate poultices and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the hand, then treat it as tents [i.e., immobilize it], and apply splints made of plaster until it is sound.
de la routure de la mandibule	Mandible fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken from behind and there is no wound in front, and the break is only on one side without being broken into pieces internally, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should put your left index finger in the patient's mouth; and if it is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger in the patient's mouth, feel the break lightly with it, and support it from behind with your other hand, keeping it level.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone is broken into two pieces and dislocated from each other, then you should apply traction from both sides until it is even again.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture of them, then tie them together with a thread of gold, silver or silk, then place cerate on the broken jawbone and place over it two thicknesses of cloth; then place over the cloth a large well-made splint made of wood or a piece of leather cut to the size of the jawbone, and fasten it under the chin so that you can hold it. Command the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the face begins to swell up, then untie it on the third day, and then readjust what was loosened; then place a poultice over it made of flour with egg white or sesame flour mixed together, after you have removed the cerate; then place light linen over the poultice, and if the poultice becomes too hot, but the condition of the patient does not change, leave it on until it is healed. Many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if inflammation comes with heat, then apply what we have said many times [i.e., treat the inflammation as previously described].
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, make sure that no part of the bone has been taken out; then extract it with instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity [i.e., cauterize it].
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the broken pieces and none remain, then sew up the wound if it is large, and place over it one of the poultices suitable for promoting granulation until it is healed.
de la forcele	Here is an entry from a medieval French medical manuscript about reducing fractures of the jawbone (mandible):
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks often before and around the shoulder, and there are three ways this break can occur: where it is broken but not dislocated in two places, with fragments present, which is the easiest to reset; or where there is breaking along with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is as follows: when there is no wound accompanying the break, you should have two assistants. One will hold the forceps that has been broken; the other will extend the collar towards the part affected by the break. Then place both hands evenly on either side of the break so that its shape is restored correctly, with neither appearance nor depression present.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round pad made of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, its size depending on your needs. Then stretch and lift the forceps, holding the pad in your hand so that you can evenly align the break as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you are unable to grasp the head of the forceps at the front because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on their back with their shoulders supported by a pillow. Insert a medium-sized ear spoon under the shoulder, and have an assistant press down on the shoulder until the bone of the forceps lifts up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then align the fracture with your two hands, and if you find it displaced, then you must cut on it; and pull out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any hindrance, then use one of the incisoires that you have; but place the forceps underneath this instrument, for support.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	And it resembles a spoon, and is not raised, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and has two tines, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, like the width of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And once you are certain of hot inflammation, then close the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt there is hot inflammation, then fill the wound with lint and bandages according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot inflammation occurs, then soak one cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dressing for the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you place on top of the bone a compress made from powder of millstone and ground egg whites, and place light dressings on top, and place a splint underneath if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide bandage about a palm's width, then place a folded cloth on top of the dressings and compress; then take a thin strip of linen three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around this bandage so that the ends of the bandage are hanging down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	And place the strip on top of the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck and underneath the healthy shoulder and the injured shoulder; and the bend in each part, and when you see that the wrapping holds the fracture well, and you can clearly see that the strip does not move on top of the broken bone, then rewrap it every day, and when the wrappings loosen, then tighten them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow underneath his shoulder when he sleeps to lift up his injured arm; thus lighten the fracture of its weight by elevating the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, but do not untie it unless necessary for twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then start the wrapping again if necessary, and tighten it and leave it like that until it is healed; and it heals in twenty-eight days at most, and sometimes sooner in some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It may happen that the shoulder bone breaks wide or in the middle and is not visible on the outside, and can only be felt by touch. So arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and wrap it according to its natural form in every way you can; then place powder of millstone with ground egg whites and light dressings on top, and place a folded cloth on top; then place a wide and thin strip, a little wider than the shoulder, on top, and if there are any hollows under the strip in some parts of the shoulder, then fill those hollows with linen wadding so that the strip lies evenly; then wrap it firmly all around with a wide bandage so that the strip does not move from its place, and check the wrapping every day; and every time it loosens, tighten it, and if the strip has moved from its place, then put it back in its proper position, and make the patient lie on his side. And the shoulder bone heals in twenty days or twenty-five at most. And when this number of days is completed, then unwrap it, but be sure, for this is not a bone that easily becomes displaced lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and is not under the heart, then cut it off, and do what we have said in the treatment for a broken collarbone to calm the hot inflammation.
de la brisure dou pis	Here ends the treatment for a broken shoulder blade
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The ribs are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, they often break on the side. And when they are broken in the middle, they sag downwards and the patient feels great pain, shortness of breath, and dizziness, and sometimes vomits blood, and the hollows in the broken ribs can be felt clearly by touch.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, and places one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and carefully puts them even in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then puts emplastes and compresses on top of the subtle salt bandage, or another light wood, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the tying roundly to the back, and tightens evenly, and loosens each hour the tie, and if it unravels, then tightens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corruption or for itch that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and unties it, and removes the emplaster, and addresses what has come of ways of treatments; then resets the emplaster, and tightens until it is sound."
de la brisure des costes	"of the breaking of the ribs"
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	"You should know that the breaking of ribs only happens in large places after the back, and at the head within, and they do not bend unless because they are glarious; and you can feel it well with inspection of the two sides."
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	"And the restoration is that you put the break even as it should be. And then puts the emplaster on it, and tightens with a bandage, if you have need."
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	"And if the breaking of ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and soon they have points, and coughs up a lot of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancients put much effort into it."
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	"And there are those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the belly, to push the break outwards."
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	"We do not do this, lest many boils come if they were not there before."
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	"And if they have come, then heal them."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	"And some say that one places cupping glasses on the spot to draw out forcibly, and this seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glass draws out excesses to the location due to its nature of weakness."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And some say that one should cover the spot with damp wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to keep the bandage even around it, then treat with the pleurisy remedy of meat and medicine."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot endure due to the bone protruding through the skin, then doubt arises in the patient whether it is necessary to cut above the spot of the broken rib and place an instrument underneath the chest wall; then one must trim the bone and draw it out gently, then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with dressings until it heals. And if red inflammation comes, one places moistened bandages in rose oil on the spot, and treats the place according to what pertains to inflammation; let them lie on their side where they should until they are healed."
de la brisure dou col	"concerning the fracture of the neck"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is bone fracture of the neck, which often occurs when it bends; similarly with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And if this happens to someone and you want to know whether they will recover or not, take note if you see their hands softened, swollen and numb, and unable to move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that he is mortally injured in several ways, and if they move and feel it well when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back and you want to know whether he will recover or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if there is an accident in his hands, and wind escapes suddenly without intention on the back; and when he is turned onto his belly, wind escapes suddenly without intention. And when he is turned onto his back and wants to raise himself up, he cannot do so. Know that he is mortally injured: do not waste time with treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then the case is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should watch if there is any hot boil, and apply rose oil or oil of mulefoot chicken foot until it is soothed. Then apply one of the comforting and drying emplastes, bind it with a bandage, and order the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to apply something on the chest. Remove the bone and then sew up the two edges of the wound if it is large with a stitch. Then treat it with salve until it is healed. And if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the "joint of the cow", put your left hand's fist into it and make it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the emplastre and bind it if necessary; then tighten it, and if there are bones dislocated, remove them and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Regarding the fracture of the thighbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It sometimes happens that the thighbone is broken, and if it does happen, there will be a slight diminution of sensation at the head. It opens on the long side, declines towards the partition, and comes to the patient with pain and piercing at the spot where it breaks; it swells up what has been broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	"And the reduction is that you extend your hand upwards until you are above the fracture; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, then set that break even until it is in natural shape."
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	"And if the fracture is long or slants inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the reduction of that fracture may be convenient."
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	"And once you have set it even, then put on a splint, then put on a stick or bone splint, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and support the place of the ribs until the joint is aligned."
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	"And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back."
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	"And if an inflamed boil appears,
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, one must reset it according to one of two methods: either by taking a piece of coarse wood shaped like this:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two joints with two ropes and hang them up high, then have the patient sit on one seat; then break his arm against the wood until it reaches the elbow pit and is in between a wooden curve, then weigh it down with something heavy that the minister pulls down; then place the break evenly in your hands together so the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is to prop up the patient on their bed and have them hold their hand at their neck; then command two ministers such that one pulls the part above the break towards him while the other pulls the lower part downwards, each one stretching in his respective direction.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the traction is too strong, then tighten one rope below and above the break and stretch each minister in their respective direction. And if the break is close to the shoulder joint, you must put one rope in the middle under the elbow pit and another towards the side, under the break; likewise, if the break is towards the side, you must gently place it without effort so that the break is even on its level and on the side; then place the break evenly as it should be and tighten it, provided no splints come loose.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if splints come loose, do not tighten it up to 27 days and place moist linen on the elbow pit and rose oil so that the inflammation subsides; then tighten it, and the way to tighten it is as follows: put the bandage on the break, then assemble the arm on the support, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; then place the cloth and tighten it on the support and on the arm so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the bone is not setting properly, use stars and place a larger and stronger star on the break with two spaces between each star; each star should be large enough to extend three fingers beyond the break on either side. Then tighten it onto the stars as I described at the beginning of this chapter for the break, tightening more firmly but without stretching out too much.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the position of the stars and the tightening as we have said when you reset the broken limb, and you suspect inflammation, leave it tied for up to seven days as we have said; then look at the bandage every three days to ensure that there is no itching or swelling or numbness in the limb due to the bandage being too tight. Then remove it as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the bandage until after three days or more; let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach. Place a cushion filled with wool evenly underneath the support and watch every hour of the day or night to ensure that the position of the broken limb does not move or that the bandages are not loosening. Remove it by the virtue of medicine as we have said before, and give them food in such a way that at first it is subtle, then later more substantial. And it is customary for the support and the leg to be removed after 40 days; then you should remove the bandage and apply baths and ointments to help healing. And if the stiffness is severe or contracted, it may take up to ten days or two months to remove it.
de la brisure du bras	Here is an English translation of the French text about the treatment of a broken arm:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "fossicles," one of which is small, that guides the thumb; the other is large, located below it near the little finger. Sometimes only the large fossicle breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, but occasionally both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small splints are broken, restoration is easy, and so is healing; but when the large ones are broken, healing is difficult and more painful than when they break together. If only the small splint is broken, it should be extended a little and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	But if it is the large splint that is broken, then it should be stretched more strongly; and extend it over one cushion, and draw the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the little finger hang lower than the other fingers, and let the patient lie crossed on himself, with one cushion placed before him higher up so that he suffers no pain. Then the minister extends his left arm at the side below the patient's hand or to a support, and another minister does likewise above it. And then the physician puts it back in place according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, place each one in its proper place; and if there is any misplaced piece that touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound along with the fracture, I spoke about it in the chapter on wounds; take care accordingly.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if during the restoration there appear black blisters, then apply one cloth of rose cerate made with oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and bind one cloth over it gently until the black blisters are soothed. Then remove the cerate and fill the cavity with powder from the millstone mixed abundantly with egg whites, then put on splints, and make the splint for the fracture a bit stronger and slightly wider than the others; and know that there should be six splints for the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two, and tie more tightly at the fracture site than elsewhere, and gradually loosen as it heals, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths on the fracture site be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread used for binding be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And monitor the limb and the bandage after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest not too tightly. And then begin binding again, and if the bandage has loosened and the bone has become dislocated, or something similar happens, then address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if care is taken that the healing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you should loosen it a little and leave it like that for some days until the healing reaches it, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things that we have said happens to the patient, then do not untie it for up to 20 days or more around there, and then when he puts his hands on his neck, let his neck be level, and guard against movement and dislocation, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and sometimes in 20 days, according to the compositions and temperaments of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Chapter 18: On the Fracture of the Hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and on our elbows there are few fractures, and only then do they occur frequently.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or dislocated, then it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged, and sit upright facing straight ahead; then he places his hand on a flat surface, and the surgeon extends the broken bones and aligns them correctly until they are well joined together; and applies a plaster bandage and splints if necessary, then places a roller according to the size of the area; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is on the inside of the palm near the wrist, then a splint made of cloth is created and the patient is instructed to apply it to their broken palm; then it is wrapped with a long cloth strip, and the roller should be soft and as large as the palm of the hand, and it is wrapped in such a way that it fits properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, then a roller should be placed on top of it and another underneath in the palm so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap everything around the hand tightly and secure the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in any of the fingers, if it's the thumb, then align it properly and wrap it with the palm, and if you see fit place a small straight roller to hold up the fracture so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in another finger, such as the index or one of the others, then align it and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after it; or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever seems best, or place a roller on top like on the thumb; and be careful about heat and inflammation, and treat anything hot that arises, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Fracture of the thighbone
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thighbone is often fractured and it can be seen when it twists forward or backward, and the treatment for this is to apply one bandage above the fracture and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their back, then each assistant extends their bandage to their respective side evenly, and this is done when the fracture is in the bone itself.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thighbone, one bandage should be placed towards the knee and the other below the fracture. And likewise if it is near the knee joint, then place the bandages on the knee and extend them downwards; then the surgeon aligns the bone with both hands until it is in its natural position, then apply the plaster cast and wrap it tightly, provided that no inflammation occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is heat and inflammation, allow it to subside first before returning to your work and treatment; the bandages are applied in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap a firm bandage doubled in two or three layers over the fracture and remove any excess, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the thigh, insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee and bring the ends up above; then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, place rollers on the fracture and on the shinbone, then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth strips to make it even, then start tying tightly with three or four turns above the fracture and loosen gradually as you go higher up from the fracture; then tie the two ends of the thread that were inserted between the leg and thigh, and tie three rollers on top, then return below to the end of the thread until you reach the foot, then tighten it so that it does not move from its position, leave it like this until no heat or swelling or other signs appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if inflammation occurs, remove the bandages and treat what has appeared, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, it is necessary to remove them if possible; and if not, it is necessary to cut open the space and draw out pus; then continue treatment until the patient is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone is fractured in such a way that rollers are applied to it, as in the case of the elbow and arm; however, with this type of treatment, the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is healed in about one month or a little less or more, depending on the variety of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	Ligamentous injury of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that there are few fractures in the ligament of the knee, but it often bends. And if it breaks, then it is only a crack or hole, and this happens with and without wounds, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is to align what has shifted on its sides until it is assembled as much as possible, then apply plaster and place a round roller if necessary, and tighten as needed, then follow all the procedures that we have said for other fractures, such as heat inflammation and other signs; treat each situation with what is appropriate until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Fractures of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that there are two bones in the leg, one is called by right "mustelz" and the other "fuscile"; and all kinds of fractures happen to it as they do to the arm, and for this reason the treatment is the same as that of the arm, and all operations are done the same way.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are fractured together, then turn the leg in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fibula is broken, turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	"And if the big bone is broken, great pain is felt and it is clearly seen. Then apply traction, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly. Nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly with many pieces, then traction should be lighter and gentler, and align according to your ability."
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"After completing your task, take two strips of wood and wrap them around the leg on both sides, from the knee downwards. Then wrap two layers of bandage over and under these strips, tie it in the middle so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left. This is well done. Some people also use a splint made of wood the length of the leg to prevent movement, especially if there is an open wound at the fracture site. Move the leg every day to check for any signs of heat, infection, or other complications. Continue this care until it is fully healed."
de la brisure des os dou piet	"Of the fracture of the bones of the foot"
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	To the ankle there is no fracture,
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	"And if there is fracture of the foot bones, and you see these bones projecting over one another, then place that patient's foot on the ground, as if they were about to walk, and then place your foot upon theirs where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and bandages, and place beneath the stomach of the foot a small table with two heads, then bind it securely, and wrap it with cloths and other necessary items."
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	"And when three or four days have passed, undo the bandages, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated."
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	"And if there are any broken toes, set them straight as we have said for the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint along the length of the broken toe and make it slightly wider; then place beneath the foot that small table which I mentioned earlier, and bind it securely. If two or three, or more than three, toes are broken, then place on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the table underneath the foot; let them be placed upon the top of the table so that they may support the arch of the foot."
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	"And remember not to forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, and treat each case according to what is appropriate."
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	"Regarding the fracture of the wrist bone"
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When the wrist bone is broken in women, make her sit comfortably, then tilt her towards the back, supported by someone behind her. Fill the hollow of the wrist with cotton and insert a stick as thick as one's finger into it. Then raise the woman slightly, little by little, until the cotton reaches the opening of the wrist, pushing the bone back into place along with the stick. Leave her like this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored. If you wish to check, take a bladder of a sheep and attach a tube to its opening. Blow air through the tube until the bladder is filled inside the wrist. The wrist joint will return to its proper place; then fill it with cotton and leave it like this for several days until it heals."
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	"And when the wrist bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the thighbone; these fractures are not hidden to those who apply themselves diligently to this work and follow my book. For the fracture indicates in various ways the correct path to restoration: listen carefully."
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	"When the penis is broken, take a goose neck and insert it into the penis. Then wrap cloths around it and leave it like this for three days or thereabouts, and it will heal quickly."
de brisure avec plaie	"Regarding fractures with wounds"
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should have his wound cleaned immediately, so that the stitches we have mentioned may testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then apply a dressing of vitriol, if you have none other, and then begin to reset the fracture in the same hour or on the same day, unless some obstacle arises.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if some obstacle arises, then leave the reduction until a new day, until the inflammation is subdued, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring on an evil complication.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the exposed heart, it is necessary that you place it at ease quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not sufficient for you to place it evenly with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which is twenty or twenty-eight inches long and has a width according to the size of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, depending on what is needed in each case of fracture; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your operation, and let it be pointed at the front and thicker in the middle forward like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a "palainche", for which reason the curved bone must be placed on top of the exposed end of the bone; and strike it once until it returns to its original position, and let them be even with each other. And if the fracture is fine and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then you must cut off the end of the bone so that the instrument can have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then use a suitable instrument such as the incision knife or the bone cutter with all your strength; then reset that which remains in the bone by scraping off its roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position. So do whatever you can to bring it back into its proper place, then moisten one cloth with black stypptic wine, especially if it is summer; and do not put cerate or any other ointment on the wound, lest corruption come from it. Then apply dressings after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cut away the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the dressing does not press against the fracture; for many times foolish surgeons have done this and brought death or corruption upon the patient. And let the bandage be softer and more gentle than those used for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large and you fear that some mischance may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then do not put on dressings, but wrap it with hard cloths and tie them on. And when you see, after one or two days, that the wound has begun to suppurate, then remove what you had applied with wine, and put on healing ointment such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dress the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is sound and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bowels can pass downward easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it still cannot heal but the bowels become obstructed again, know that there are small bone fragments causing this pain. Therefore, you must open the wound with a tent, and remove all these unwanted fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula or other corruption appears in the area, then you must treat it according to what is said in its chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the hipbone or the shinbone, and others like them on the large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times gangrene comes from this, but let it be until it rots away; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And of fractures that come upon the union
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times fractures come upon the union after it has healed, especially when they are near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural movements.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore beware if the nail is fresh: you must administer stypptic medicines such as aloes, frankincense, myrrh, sarcocolle, aconite, and similar others. So take some of these things or all together, and mix them with stypptic wine or with egg yolk or with axle grease; then put them on the nail in poultices and bind it tightly, and do not untie it for many days; then remove it and begin another one until the nodule is removed. Or you may bind a well-made piece of lead upon it, for the property of lead is to draw out all swellings from the limbs. And if the nodule has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut it open on top and remove the excess that appears. Or have it removed by some barber until it is gone, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone has been reset and afterward the limb remains weak and feeble, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been. Or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb. Or because of too much restraining. Or because of too great movements, not at the proper time. Or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is to make the sick person eat well and exercise his body until blood increases in him. And administer baths, and give him joy and happiness. Then put pitch on the limb so that it attracts great nourishment to it, and apply warm water compresses often until nourishment reaches the limb, and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of the limb that is crooked after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration,
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	"Sometimes dislocation occurs due to prolonged, continuous rubbing with moist hands. And arrange for gentle motion of the limb every hour."
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	"And if the tortuosity is worn out and hardened, like stone, and it needs to be removed by iron, then one must cut all the way down to the bone with a fine, light-bladed scalpel. And use caution and skill in this procedure."
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	"Here begins the book of dislocations."
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	"Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its proper place, preventing it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient."
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	"If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must be immediately reduced without delay."
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	"But if it is delayed, the site will swell up, and if one tries to put it back then it will hardly return to its place. Therefore, one should not attempt to move it while it is swollen: often this leads to spasms and other pains."
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	"Nevertheless, when this happens, one should bleed the patient, then leave him until the inflammation has subsided; then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, gently move it, and treat each joint as it comes back into its proper place."
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	"And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from head to foot."
des mandibules	"of the jawbone(s)"
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	"It sometimes happens that the jawbones are dislocated inward, and their dislocations occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their proper place and softened somewhat; or else they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chin, causing saliva to flow out of the mouth so that it cannot be held in, nor can the mouth be closed, and the tongue becomes entwined with speech."
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	"If the dislocation is slight, it returns on its own through various manipulations."
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	"And if it is complete and has happened suddenly, then you must quickly manipulate it without delay;"
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	"and do it in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor places a little finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation within the mouth if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other hand holding steady, and commands the patient to relax his jaws and move them in all directions."
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	"And the doctor places it back into its proper place until it returns."
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	"And if the dislocation returns suddenly, especially if both jawbones have been dislocated together, then bathe them in warm water and oil until they can be gently manipulated without delay, as we have said."
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	"And when they are properly reduced and the patient's mouth can be closed without being too loose, then place moistened cloths made of waxed oil and pitch on them, then bind it gently with soft bandages;"
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	"and have the patient sleep on his back with two pillows between his cheeks so that he does not move them to the right or left nor try to chew, but takes only soft food until the pain has subsided and the jawbones are firmly set."
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	"And then he may chew whatever he wishes easily, and should not strain his mouth when eating or drinking until the jawbone is well healed."
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	"And if the two jawbones cannot be properly reduced within an hour and are not returned to their proper place, then fever and chills will ensue, sometimes with diarrhea, and occasionally with vomiting of bile."
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	"And when you see these symptoms, know that it is a loss [of life]; for many people who suffer from them die within eight days."
de la forcelle	"of dislocation of the jawbone at the angle"
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	"The angle [of the jaw] cannot be dislocated towards the cheek from within and from below the chin, but sometimes it can be dislocated backwards, which is easily felt."
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	"And the reduction is done by having the patient lie on his back with his arms extended, then pressing firmly at the angle of the jaw with your palm so that it returns to its proper place; then apply a plaster and bind it tightly;"
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	"and the cheek that is towards the ear cannot be dislocated; if it is slightly displaced or if it has been dislocated, then reduce it to its proper place as we have said, apply a plaster and bind it tightly, and command the patient to rest until he is healed."
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	"And the cheekbone is reduced in the same way when it has been dislocated from its proper place."
de la dislocation de l’espaule	"of dislocation of the shoulder blade"
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	"Know that the shoulder blade is dislocated in one of three ways: either at the lower part of the glenoid cavity; or at the side of the chest; or rarely at the upper part."
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	"and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder blade nor inward among the nerves; and often it dislocates downwards towards the glenoid cavity, especially in those who have little flesh because it slips out quickly; but in those with sufficient flesh, it slips out hardly at all."
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	"Sometimes, however, some men suffer a blow or a fracture and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat, causing them to believe that it has been dislocated."
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	"It is therefore necessary for you to examine him until you are certain [of the diagnosis]; and then begin the treatment."
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	"And it is recognized that a dislocation has occurred when it has slipped downwards towards the glenoid cavity, and you will see a noticeable difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one."
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	"and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder and below the glenoid cavity where the head of the humerus touches it as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand near to his neck nor move it in any way."
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	"And likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden because you will find it distinctly by touching it;"
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	"and this type of dislocation cannot be reduced except when it is fresh or if the patient is a child."
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	"The method is for the practitioner to lift the patient's hand upwards, then place his fingers below the glenoid cavity and forcefully elevate the joint upwards into its proper place while the practitioner lifts the arm and extends it upwards; it will slip back quickly."
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	"But if it does not slip back as we have described even after several days, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and anointed with softening and soothing ointments such as decoctions of marshmallow, fenugreek, and marsh mallow roots boiled in water."
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	"Then have the patient lie on his back and place a soft, but not too soft or hard, pad of linen cloth beneath the glenoid cavity. Then place your heel on the pad and gently elevate the head of the shoulder blade while pulling the patient's arm;"
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	"and another practitioner should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downwards. The shoulder blade will slip back immediately into its proper place if you perform the reduction in this manner;"
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	"and you should have present a man who is taller than the patient. He should stand directly opposite the affected side and place his shoulder beneath the glenoid cavity of the patient while lifting the arm upwards so that the patient hangs from it;"
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another servant pulls down the patient's hand towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, he places something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the dislocation can also be reset in another manner: and one plants a long stick in the ground, the thickness of which should be about that of a finger, not too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then the stick is placed under the patient, but so that he has soft pillows above him, and the patient should be lying along the length of the wood; then his hand should be extended downwards on the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a stick of two spans long and four fingers wide, which has a round head for entering into the joint deeply under the armpit, like this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie cloths under the head of the stick so that the stick does not hurt the patient; then place it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm along the length of the stick, and tie the sling to the stick, and the bandage at the top of the hand, then place the arm on one end of a board of similar width, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging down on the other side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, however it may be, then place under the armpit a wisp of wool; then put on the emplaster made with flour powder, with incense and egg yolk all around the shoulder, then wrap it tightly under the armpit, and twist the bandage onto the plaster, and bind the hand to its collar, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he should eat little until the member is comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and afterwards he may eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, then you should apply cauterization through three holes, as it is shown in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after twenty days the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the breast and nipples, or behind, is caused by a push or stretching of the hands, and another bandage should be applied; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing there comes pain in the member and slowness of movement, then the patient should often apply hot compresses until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	About dislocation of the elbow
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the elbow joint is dislocated inwards and returns inwards, and it is dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not concealed because one can see and feel it well, and it is dislocated according to each type of figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you bring the arm of the sick person alongside the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is displaced and he cannot bend his arm nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reduce it before an abscess forms there, for if an abscess forms, it will be difficult to reduce, and perhaps it cannot be completely reduced, especially when it is behind; such dislocations are worse than others and cause greater pain, and sometimes gangrene occurs.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the reduction is when it can be reduced in such a way that you extend his hand with both your hands; and spread his arm, and place your hands on the elbow from above, below and around, and press the joint against the wrist or the root of the palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he folds his hand towards his hand and presses the elbow that is dislocated against the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension. And this is how: two ministers extend the arm and hold it tightly so that it does not move during the extension. Then twist the arm on each side, and wrap a doubled cloth long and wide around it
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the surgeon has joined the joint with his hand, then he should anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, and then press the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in its place, then put on a dry plaster with egg white and press it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient and leave it for several days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, then untie the bandage and leave it. And if you see that the joint is not quite firm, then start again with the plaster and the bandage, leaving it on for several days until it is well secured, then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after the reduction of the joint and it moves, then bathe him and rub him gently and press until he is comforted; or place a greasy sheep's wool poultice on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it and put him in a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, then rub the joint moderately with a cloth, then put back the poultice and then enter the bath. Do this two or three times until he is healed. And if it still hurts, then place a moist compress of warm wheat flour mixed with butter on it and press it firmly until it returns to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	hand dislocations
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint is easily dislocated and its reduction is also easy compared to other joints. Therefore it must be reduced as soon as possible, before the place becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reduction is done by placing the injured hand on a table and extending it with the help of ministers. The surgeon should then place his palm on top of the joint and press until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, you should always check that it is properly reduced. Then the patient should place the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of his hand on the table and the surgeon should place his hand on top of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing compresses to prevent an abscess from forming and leave them on without removing them again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to put it back in place after several days, then the joint will remain dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And it will cause no harm to the patient except that his hand will be weakened and he will not be able to grasp anything: then know that the nerves or arteries are cut, so there is no other remedy than to use a cautery near the case, and sometimes nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then untie it and let it remain so."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then apply warm water and rub until it is smooth."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	"No finger of the hand is dislocated at any point, not on the back of the palm or the front."
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	"Then take hold of the finger, and pull the dislocation back until it returns. Then support the top of the finger and push it toward the part where it is dislocated."
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	"Leave it for two days, then align it the following day. And the rest, as we have said, and when untied on the third day, move it gently, and bind it again. Do this often until it is firm."
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	"And do the same if it is dislocated on the front of the hand, and do so until it is healed. And do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere."
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"Regarding the dislocation of the heel bone of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	"When the heel bone of the foot or leg is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment for this, as the damage is already done."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	"And the sign is that the person suddenly falls without intending to, and cannot get up again, and many times some member becomes weakened, either both thighs or one arm."
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	"And often the heel bone moves to three places; that which moves at the back is called 'gilbositez':"
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	"The treatment for this is that if 'gilbositez' has come from childhood, then there is no hope of recovery or healing."
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	"And those that come from a fall or blow or similar things, the ancient physicians used to describe various treatments with great words, but they were not very effective."
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	"but I have abbreviated it according to my intention and have devised tools in various ways."
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	"I say that there is no remedy nor health for the 'gilbositez' that comes on the front of the foot"
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	"And also that which comes directly to both sides and cannot be cured except for that one that properly comes to the back."
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	"And it is necessary that the sick person be laid on their face in one place and have something under them so they do not hurt themselves."
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	"Then plant a stake firmly in the ground at the head and another at the feet of the sick person. Then tie one rope around their ankles and another around their hips, knees, and ankles."
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	"And two assistants should hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;"
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	"And let them be tied firmly, with the stake as we have said, and the doctor press their palms firmly on the heel bone until it returns."
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	"And if the heel bone does not return with this treatment, then take a plank of wood three feet long and place it under the bed. The sick person should be on their side, and put the end of the plank under the bed, then place the middle of the plank on the heel bone;"
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	"and the doctor should put their feet on the other end of the plank and press firmly until it returns to its place. And if you see that it does not return, then do the same on the side that turns towards the hand."
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	"And it is necessary that you plant two stakes at the head of the sick person's bed and another two near their feet, with a space of one palm length between each stake."
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	"And each stake should have a hole where the dislocation occurs, and they should be firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move. And between each pair of stakes there should be one turning stake on which the rope turns, with two small stakes of one palm length each to help turn the dislocation."
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	"And then tie the rope that is around the dislocation towards the head and the other rope towards the feet to the other turning stake. And each assistant should turn their stake with all the rope, and the master should place the heel bone in its proper position as we have said."
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"And when it is in place, then put on a dry poultice with plenty of egg yolks. Then apply bandages and then the splint made from a board three feet long, which should cover the area of the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine. Then tie it with a rope as we have said, and let the sick person be nourished on a soft diet until they are healed."
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	"And if anything happens at the end of the healing process, then one should administer softening and soothing medications along with the splint that we have mentioned earlier. And sometimes one can also administer a plaster."
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	"And sometimes the appearance of the spine at the back can seem like a dislocation, but it is not. It is simply the bone that is visible, and one should not assume too much or presume to treat it, as this could potentially lead to death."
des dislocations de la hainche	"Dislocations of the hip joint"
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	"Know that the hip and shoulder joints only have dislocations, unlike other joints. The hip joint is unstable in four ways: internally and externally, and anteriorly and posteriorly. It is more unstable internally than elsewhere, and somewhat less stable anteriorly and posteriorly."
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	"And the sign of internal hip dislocation is that when the sick leg is placed next to the healthy one, it appears longer and the sick knee joint opens wider. The sick person cannot bend their knee at a right angle."
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	"And the area that is swollen with heat and has an abscess near it indicates the location of the dislocation, as the thighbone comes there."
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	"And the sign of external hip dislocation is that these accidents are opposite to those mentioned earlier."
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	"And the sign of anterior hip dislocation is that the leg appears well-formed, but the knee cannot be bent without pain. If one tries to make the person walk, they cannot do so and hold back their urine. The ankle swells, and when they walk, they limp on the heel."
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	"And the sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the knee cannot be extended or bent, and the leg appears shorter than the other one. The ankle is relaxed, and the thighbone is located below the ribs."
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	"The treatment for this condition resembling hip dislocation is to examine whether the dislocation is old or new. If it is old and has healed in its displaced position, then there is no treatment for it. One should not attempt to reduce such a dislocation, as doing so could cause harm."
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	"For those hip dislocations that are fresh and occur in four ways (internal, external, anterior, and posterior), one should quickly reduce the dislocation using traction either internally or externally, and then move it to the right or left. If reduced correctly, no further treatment is necessary."
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	"But if the dislocation cannot be reduced in this manner, then one must prepare a strong assistant and pull on the leg with both hands or use a rope tied around the knee to provide traction."
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And another servant extends his hand thus, placing his hands under the patient's buttocks, then grasps the thigh gently with a lien, while another holds the head of the lien.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	All at once they extend up and down so that the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common for four members, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, one must attend to the limb's care. When dislocation is on the hip, one should place the patient on his sound side, then put the lien on the root of the thigh, and where it is under the angle, then extend the lien upwards towards the angle, and towards the bone.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then another servant takes the patient's arms, embraces the great bone of the thigh on the affected side, and extends it strongly outwards; thus it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot set it in this way that we have said, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a soft strong lien on both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended two spans more than the other
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then let him be hung by the head on the top of a beam, and let him hang two arms' lengths above the ground; then command one servant to embrace the hipbone, and another servant who is hanging with the patient embraces the thigh strongly, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is outward, let the patient lie on his side as we have said in the case of hip displacement, and stretch one lien over the affected thigh properly, also over the foot
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two wedges, one at the head and one at the feet, then stick one wedge between the thighs of the patient in the shape of a V;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	"And let him place wet cloths around to prevent the patient from being burned, then each attendant should extend towards him, and the physician should hold the dislocation steady with his hand."
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	"If it returns, that is good. If not, place him on a bed and press as we have said for dislocation of the hip, and let the patient lie on the healthy side."
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	"And when the dislocation is anterior, then one must extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and let the physician place his pain on the affected angle of the hip, then press with the other hand, extending towards the knee."
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	"And if the dislocation is posterior, then one must not extend the affected leg downwards nor lift it from the ground, but rather let it be as if the hip were dislocated posteriorly, as we have said about childbirth on the two hips."
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	"and let it be on its face, and the cloth extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint with the knee."
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	"And it will be done when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then join the thighs together, place the splint, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move."
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	"And let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then remove the splint and replace it. If the legs are even, then bind again as before and leave for another 3 days. Then remove the splint and let him go slowly until the member is comfortable."
de la dislocation dou genoil	Dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	"The kneecap can be dislocated in three ways: inside and outside, and behind; it does not dislocate in front."
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	"And the sign is that you tell the patient to bend his leg towards his thigh, and if it does not articulate with the thigh, then know that it is dislocated."
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	"And the reduction of all [types of dislocation] is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, then place your back on his face and place his foot on yours."
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	"Then take his kneecap in your palms and withdraw between your thighs, then strongly bend both sides of the knee; another assistant should extend his foot until the kneecap returns to its place, and the sign is that it articulates lightly with the thigh."
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	"And place the splint on it and let the leg articulate with the thigh, then bind them strongly together for 3 or 4 days, then remove [the splint]. And do not allow the patient to move until the member is comfortable."
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the member is not in place, then strongly extend it as we have said in the treatment of the hip until it is straightened."
de la dislocation dou talon	Dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel is sometimes twisted and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	"And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it tends forward at the part where it is dislocated:"
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	"The reduction is easy, and one should gently extend it with both hands when it is only twisted."
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	"And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright and have one assistant pull him forward by the leg above the ankle:"
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	"Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards and gently push the foot upwards:"
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	"And do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return:"
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	"And if it cannot be reduced in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, firmly plant a stake in the ground between his thighs, and tie the straps around so that they do not injure the patient;"
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	"Then one assistant pulls the thigh, while another extends the foot with both hands or with a rope tied around the heel;"
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	"Then each assistant gently extends until the stake is always between the patient's thighs to hold him when he is extended;"
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	"Then the surgeon gently places his hands on the dislocation and one assistant pulls the healthy leg downward, and the dislocation will quickly return."
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	"And when it is in place, then apply the splint and bandages, and strap it strongly, tie the foot to the leg, and watch carefully that the ligatures behind the ankle are not too tight;"
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	"Then leave it for 2 or 3 days and if the ligatures slacken, then strap it again; remove it on the third or fourth day, but prohibit walking for four days."
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	"And if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again."
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if inflammation comes afterwards, then you must calm it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	about the elbows
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the elbows are dislocated, they should be gently reduced without force, and this is an easy thing to do."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	"And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, then you should make the patient sit upright on a level seat or table and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns."
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when it is in place and there is nothing more apparent, then place a splint with two forks underneath the sole of the foot, then strap it strongly and leave it for three days before removing it; then let him rest until he is healed."
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	About wounds and dislocations at the same time
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When an injury comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it,
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and cautious, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	At the beginning, use gentle remedies to ease inflammation and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when you see hope [for improvement], then straighten the limb now before inflammation increases.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, then apply remedies to reduce inflammation and dress the wound with drying ointments as appropriate.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if there has been a fracture along with dislocation, and small bones are dislocated, then set the bone and do what we have said for simple fractures.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And guard yourself from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for this is more harmful to you according to your Creator, and for the sake of preserving your weapon and body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	The end of the treatise on physics
