O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, my dearest son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came upon me to envision that I would complete it with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is much neglected in our region and has been entirely suppressed everywhere, the science has therefore perished and its strength lies only in the small descriptions found in books which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is ignored.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I wish to revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the iron tools for cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And therefore, whoever engages in this must rise to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and how they move and remain at rest, and where their exit points are located.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates said that the name without work is worth little, but with work it is much; and likewise in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that anyone who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before should be careful lest they fall into error and kill people, as I have seen many times those who engage in this science without abandoning their ignorance and inexperience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut off one aposteme of scrofula from the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who removed a stone from the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he took away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for to remove it, and saw the condition of the sick man and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they tried to cut into him he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took in charge one duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaking had a wound. And the doctor, full of ignorance, tied the break above the wound with straps so tight that he did not leave any calamine on the wound, and left him like that for one day. And he ordered that it should not be untied, and thus the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come unbind his leg; and when I untied it, he felt at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption was already well established in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the member until the entire member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who burst an inflamed aposteme and then set it on fire through the wickedness of his ignorance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is free from melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all that is corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you should know that the art of hands is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For that reason it is necessary for you to be on guard, so that foolish doctors cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	So take up your arms with confidence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave difficult cases alone. And put away your arms from those things that make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not undertake difficult cases, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicated cauteries. It is arranged from the head down to the feet. It discusses the shapes of instruments, the irons for cauteries, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, cupping glasses and wounds, extracting splinters, and similar things. It is arranged with the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter concerns restoring dislocations and distortions, as well as similar matters. It is arranged from the head to the feet with the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we begin discussing the work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of each temperament and its benefit or harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of benefit and harm are lengthy discussions and subtle sciences, involving secret responses. Many wise men have spoken about this topic and agreed upon it. However, they allowed me few words because I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery universally benefits every temperament where it has material, except for two temperaments: the hot and dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Regarding the hot and dry temperament with matter, some people argue that cautery is greatly beneficial there, while others claim the opposite, saying that cautery is not useful for illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness. But those who argue otherwise say that cautery provides great benefit for hot and dry illnesses found in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body and moisture of man to the temperament of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And let no one meddle with this matter except those who have proven it and know well the chapter on cautery and the diversity of temperaments in men, as well as the dispositions, causes of their illnesses, seasons, and ages. We are not afraid for other temperaments, especially for cold and moist ones.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all physicians agreed upon the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know this, son: cautery along with fire is one of the secrets of cure and has greater benefit than cauterizing with burning medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not harm any other member if it is applied to the one being cauterized, except for those that are named otherwise.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines spread from one member to another and cause illnesses difficult to cure. Sometimes they even kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its heat and the goodness of its substance, does not cause injury unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and the length of service and study that I have devoted to this art, which is based on truth. Therefore, I apologize for the length of my words, as it does not please me to hide from you the secret contained in fire and its ability to overcome illnesses in bodies, as philosophers demonstrate; now receive these thoughts into your mind.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	"And know, son, that they agreed upon when cauteries ought to be performed, and chose priests."
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	"And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm happening underneath is diminished with the aid of the cautery; and especially if cauteries are necessary for sudden and severe pains which cannot wait until greater injury comes to the limb."
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	"And do not think, dear son, as foolish physicians sometimes do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no recurrence. They say so indeed; but it is not entirely true, because cauteries are medicines which change the complexion and dry up the humors causing pain, and they act more quickly than other medicines in their strength and power."
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	"And it is possible that sometimes the disease may come according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease itself in its power. The excess humors are collected there through consumption of foods and similar things except when cauteries are applied where there is little excess or moisture, such as those for toothache and similar ailments, and then such pain does not return; but this happens rarely."
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	"And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and indeed it is so; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth trying after medicines have failed, their intentions are mistaken, for when we have tried various remedies for a disease and they do not work, then we apply cauteries, and they are effective."
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	"So it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, but not according to the intentions of foolish physicians."
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	"The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, and they said this only because of the quality and nobility of gold. They also said that the place where a cautery is applied does not cause corruption, but this is not true, as I have proven it myself; for in some people it does cause corruption. And yet, cauteries made of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, just as they said."
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	"And besides, when you heat an instrument made of gold, you cannot tell exactly when it is hot because of the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly. And if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire, so there are many drawbacks to using them."
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	"And for these reasons we use iron cauteries that we have better adapted to our work."
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	"Now I have arranged this chapter from beginning to end so that it may be easier to find."
dou cautere olivaire	"about the olive cautery"
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	"This cautery is beneficial for moistness and coldness on the head, and there are two kinds of it that are made because of an illness called 'sodicity' and because of many humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, and for excessive sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and especially all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sciatica, apoplexy, and similar illnesses."
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	"The shape of this cautery is as follows: the patient should be purged with a soluble and moisturizing medicine for three nights or four, according to what the virtues and age and habits of the patient can tolerate. Then perform the cautery on the head of the patient."
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	"And then have the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, with their hands on their knees. Then place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their two eyes; where your middle fingers will meet is where you should make the incision, and then heat the cautery called 'olive,' which has this shape:"
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And place the cautery on the marked spot, and move it downwards and outwards little by little while turning your hand. Then lift your hand gently, and examine the area to see if you can see a small piece of bone; if not, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you. Then take a little piece of wool, soften it in warm water, put it on a cotton pad, place it on the area, and leave it for three days. After that, apply a compress made of linen soaked in butter; leave it there until the inflammation has healed. Then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is completely healed."
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	"And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself. And for this reason, it helps to leave it open longer."
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	"And some of these people say that one should leave the cautery on until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and heal it."
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	"And others say that one should leave the cautery on until it burns down to the bone as large as a thread used by women for spinning, so that the humors can flow out more easily. Then one should leave the wound open for a long time before healing and dressing it."
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	"And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me in all respects, except perhaps in some cases where there is a need for fear. But I think that it is better to leave the cautery alone; because the flesh is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we can see in other members; and even when the flesh of the patient is naturally weak, the first indication of cauterization is more salutary and beneficial for me, and this is the method that I generally use."
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	"about chronic headache"
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	"If a patient has chronic pain in the whole head that lasts for a long time, they should use diuretics and pills called 'cochiae,' and remedies for purging the head, oils, and plasters. And if one applies the cautery I mentioned earlier, it will not be beneficial."
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	"Be careful if the patient's flesh is of strong nature and not too cold; in this case, you may cauterize them with the cautery that we mentioned earlier."
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	"Afterwards make the cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the point called 'vessels,' which is where cupping glasses are placed. And do not press your hand too hard so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak about it elsewhere. And the cauteries on the horns must be finer than those used for the middle of the head, and here is the shape:"
dou cautere dou chief	"about the cautery of the head"
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head,
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine are such that you take one stalk of mallow, remove the skin and cut it into two pieces at the roots, then make a hole in the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the stalk of mallow beneath the skin; and when it has been placed so, tie it tightly and leave it thus for twelve hours; then untie it and draw out the stalk of mallow, leaving the wound thus for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until it comes out of its own accord.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is healed, and if you see that some burning medicines are needed, then refer to the twelfth treatise on burning medicines which I have written.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cautery of iron should be heated according to this manner:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a hook, with a little curve at its end and a small opening in the middle. It is placed on the painful spot and you hold your hand while slightly turning the iron so that half of the surface of the heart-shaped tip gets burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not get burnt, which lies outside, and allow plenty of blood to flow out abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterward put cotton on wool and place it on the spot for three days; then I put moistened cotton in butter, and afterward heal the spot with ointment until it is clean; and if you wish to cauterize this ulcer with the cautery called 'cultellare', do so at its tip, being careful not to touch the artery in this ulcer which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of ulcer
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat an ulcer as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries mentioned earlier with medicine and iron do not suffice for it, then you must heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it is white; and seize beforehand on the spot a line half the length of two fingers, and remove your hand once, ensuring that you do not touch the artery and that you do not reach the bone; and beware of the mandible which moves when chewing, and ensure that the nerve has no regard for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the loss of blood from the artery when it is cut or when cutting causes great fear, especially to those who are not skilled and experienced; and leave the work in mid-course; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries are not sufficient for the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is clean; and if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	For pain in the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold pain comes to the ear, and one has opened there medications dissolving and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have made a full circle around the sick ear, or around the two if the pain is in both of them, and then move it away from the root of the ear where you have marked the location, and there are ten points around each ear; afterwards cure the place until it is clean.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Tortures that must be cured by cautery are only those that move with phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauteries on those that come from scorching or inflammation of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you are curing this type of torture that moves with phlegm from hydres and purgations of the head and gargarisings, and these do not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the sick person with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little bit outside the temple, and the third in the meeting of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery against the head of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple just as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until half of the kernel is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the likeness of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a little more delicate and the knife must be a little thicker; afterwards cure the place as I have said before, until it is clean.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you are curing it as we have said, but it does not help, and the sick person does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the place that is called "vessels" as we have said before, and behind the cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the sick person large syrups and mondifying pills for the brain; afterwards raise the head of the sick person all the way up, and place on the occiput the plaster of mustard that is written about in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of cauterizing: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is cured thus, good; and if it is not, make three cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure it as the others, and if you see that they are stuck together, and the sick person is suffering, then make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, make two others on the two horns, and cure until it is healthy; and let the cauteries be those called "olivary", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with syrups and other things that we have said before; afterwards raise the head of the sick person, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the sick person is suffering, and the disease is severe, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until half of the kernel is burned, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until it is healthy, and let the cauteries be those called "olivary" that we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epilithic should only apply fire cautery to those who are phlegmatic. First, one must modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in previous sections when the patient is large and able to tolerate medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is a child who cannot tolerate this treatment, one should perform gargarisings and mastications to modify the brain frequently with good meats. Afterwards, one should raise the head in the middle and apply one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel and each horn; and if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, one should apply cauteries as I have described for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, one should apply a single subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the excesses or corrupted moisture are caused by melancholy and produce thick phlegm, then apply as many cauteries as we have described for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the excess is inclined towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist due to melancholy, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain according to what is written earlier in this section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, raise the head of the patient. Next, make one torch of well-woven linen in the shape of a circle and place it on the head. Have the patient sit crossed-legged and hold them tightly on all sides. Then present the liniment made with melted sheep's wool fat that has been warmed gradually over fire so that the patient can tolerate it when poured onto their forehead. Afterwards, remove the circle from inside the head and let it cool. Do this to the patient once a week along with other good treatments until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you wish to cauterize the eye by making more points on one cautery, this manner of cautery moistens the brain even further. Then place damp cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	Here begins a chapter on the eye.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it first comes to the eyes as described in the division by signs I've mentioned, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keeping away all moistures, and make them sweat or take many baths fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to raise his head, and make a cautery within the head, and make two cauteries upon the two temples if the descent of the eye is in two eyes together, or one if the descent is in one; and cut away all veins and arteries that are under the heart with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the breadth of the temple; and take care that there is no shedding of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery how you should stop it; and sometimes one makes a cautery or incision under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	Regarding the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and customary and are upon the veins or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside, and it is seen that they are cold superfluities of phlegm, then make the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the eye descending into the eyes: one cautery within the head, and two cauteries upon the two temples, and two cauteries or incisions under the two bones behind; and if there is need for more, then cauterize gently above the eyebrow with many small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Regarding the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have treated it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then let him drink three nights running of raw onions; afterwards raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the cautery called "olivary"; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" upon the two eyebrows, a little below the eyebrows; and take care that you do not cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivary". Here is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit, make two cauteries upon the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave your hand there except until about a third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Regarding the eyelashes that touch the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes are turned towards the inside and touch the eye, causing harm. In this case, one makes cauteries in two ways: either with fire or with a burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Where fire cauterization is ordered for the patient, let them keep their hairs long and even. If they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Once the hairs have grown and are even, then place the patient on their back. Next, draw a figure onto paper that is similar to the shape of the palm of your hand, with the beginning of the mark near the hairs; then put moist cotton in egg white and musk mallow on the eye, and then heat the cauterizing iron that has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize the drawn figure little by little many times until the skin is burnt there. The sign of the work's healthiness is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs lift at the point of the eye. Then remove your hand, and leave it like this for three days, after which put moist cotton in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards anoint it until it is sound.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back, and the skin is softened, then begin the cauterization again on that same spot as you did at first. If the hairs are missing, cauterize it until the paper returns to its natural position, and becomes even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizing iron for medical use is made by ordering the patient to let their hairs grow long and even. Then make a shape out of parchment like the leaf of a myrtle tree. Next, take three parts each of French soap and live wax, grind them well together, and do it quickly so that it does not cool. Then spread it onto the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper over the eyes. If the disease is only in one eye, then work on one; if it is in both, then do both. Put moist cotton in egg yolk under the eye. Have the patient lie on their back, and place your two fingers on top of the medicine, pressing gently once or twice whenever the patient feels a biting sensation from the medicine, for they will feel a biting sensation like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, then remove the medicine with your fingers.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the biting sensation has passed, then raise the eyelid and see if you see the paper raised as it would be by constraint of fire or by incision. If it is like this, then it is good. If not, then put more medicine on the spot where the medicine did not work until your actions are even, and your eyes sharp; then put moist cotton in butter until the burnt skin falls off, afterwards anoint the spot with "diaphoresis" ointment and other kinds until it is sound.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be very careful with your work that no medicine falls into the eye. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick the eye, then begin the medicine again on that spot where the skin has softened, properly like how you did before; after that cure it until it is sound. This is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this vary your constraints; and do not reply that which is right for you who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Here is the treatment for fistula by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in our divisions of diseases, but your treatment does not help,
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	"Instruct the patient to place their head in your hand; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or turn its head. Afterward, place damp cotton in egg white or in juice of parsley on the eye; afterward heat the cautery which is shaped thus: and it should be raised at the head like the form of a pigeon's feather, together with which should be the cautery; if you wish, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it should also be like a tent; but nonetheless, this which is raised is useful for your work."
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	"Afterward press the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it. And if it is closed, open it, and draw out the bowels. Afterward place the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and burn it."
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	"If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then recommence the cautery again once more, and yet another if you have need, and leave it for three days; afterward place damp cotton in butter on it, and continue the cure with drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then place corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed; and follow according to what would come into his chapter."
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	"And there is a manner of cautery for fistula which some of the ancients said: Understand about fistula, and cut it open; afterward place in the incision one small reed thus shaped:"
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	"And they make it to the quantity of three drops of lead; and hold your hand on the reed firmly, and do not let the patient move his head at all, so that the melted lead does not run into his eye; and it is necessary to place damp cotton in egg white or in wax on the eye of the sick person: the lead thus burns the place of the fistula, and heals it by wonderful healing."
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	"And if the fistula is healed by the cautery which we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a puncture in the eye and bring back the fistula to its proper place according to what is appropriate."
des crevaices en levres	"for cracks in lips"
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on lips which are called "hairs", especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks which we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat up a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, clean the area with wax until it is smooth.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the boil on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When a boil comes on the root of the throat or in the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and it becomes putrid and reddened and forms a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not improve: then it is necessary for you to have an cautery according to the size of the fistula. Then heat the cautery at the opening or hole of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and the surrounding area; do this once or twice, then treat it as we have said in treatments until it is healed. And if it is healed thus, that's good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the rotted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	on the mobility of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums become softened by moisture and the teeth become mobile, and you treat it with medicines but they do not help, then place the head of the patient on your lap. Afterwards, heat the cautery which will be described below in this manner: place a tube over the tooth; put the hot cautery inside quickly, holding your hand until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth. Then remove your hand and recommence the cautery according to your desire. After that, have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, keeping it in for an hour before spitting it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And thus the moving tooth is made firm, and the softened gum constrained, and corrupt moisture dried.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, whether it is hot or cold, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cautery should be used in two ways: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is performed as follows: take some butter from a cow's udder and put it on the tip of an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the end of a needle, dip it into the melted butter, and quickly place it on the aching tooth, holding it until it cools. Repeat this often so that its effects reach the root of the tooth. If you see that the cotton and wool become cold and hard with the butter, then place them on the aching tooth and hold a hot iron near the cheek until the heat reaches the base of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Cautery with fire together is performed as follows: take an iron or brass rod, thick enough that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth. Heat the cautery, the shape of which will be described later, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery cools. Repeat this often, as the pain will be relieved on the same day or the next day. The patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, then spit it out. This is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	To perform cautery on any tooth you wish, according to your skill level, use this shape for the rod:
des scrophules	"Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When scrofulas are hot and moist, cold, and not responsive to digestion with medicines, then heat the cauterizing iron as described below, which has two openings for fumes to escape from the other side; place the heated cauterizing iron on the boil once or twice until it reaches its base, depending on its size, leaving it on for three days; then cover it with cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterward cleanse the area with ointments and dressings until it is healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When moistures overcome the channels of the lungs, especially when they result from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be cleansed by dissolvent medicines. Afterward, cauterize at the root of the throat, but take care not to come too close to the throat and burn only slightly. Next, perform another cautery at the junction of the neck and head, using a cautery called 'clavile', which we have described above; afterward cleanse and dress the area until it is healthy, as previously mentioned."
de la toust	Here's how you can translate "de la toux" into English:
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the lung are of cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or heat, and the disease is chronic, then perform two cauteries on the chest in close places; and one other cautery within the breast between the breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form that is mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, perform a cautery piercing the whole cautery that is called "poins," of which the form is here above in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be up to 30 or however many are around. Afterwards cure the place according to what is mentioned before, and let there be three cauteries at intervals according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, perform them in three places.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the displacement of the shoulder joint
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder blade is dislocated due to moisture and is put back in place but cannot remain there and returns and dislocates again with even a small movement, as we have experienced it, then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards have the patient lie on their back and side; then lift the heart which is inside the titillite with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has 2 inches with this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the side, and let the figure of the cautery come together with four cauteries; and because this is done with the cautery that has 3 inches, therefore there are six cauteries for cauterization; and the nerves are according to the thinness of a thread, which is the form of the cautery that has 3 inches:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined onto this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards put on the cautery that has been crushed with salt; afterwards have the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well strengthened.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then cauterize on the thick part of the shoulder blade bone, or make many cauteries with pricking. For the joint is closed up, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healthy.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Regarding the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must perform cauteries for pleurisy with the roots of aristologia in this manner: take a root of aristologia that is long and as large as you can find, and let it be dry and also thick and long like your two fingers; and moisten it in oil, and heat it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the navel and the neck, and 2 small cauteries a little bit lower down in the part that is below the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning backwards a little bit; and one cautery inside the breast, and another on top of the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and 2 on each side of the breast away from the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand too hard, but rather do it openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancient authors said that some people used a cautery like a razor's edge, heated it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the aposteme; and when the pain goes away, as we have said in the case of the aposteme of the liver. But in this operation there is fear that the patient may die now, or else a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Regarding the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse with the methods that we have said in the chapter on treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cautery which are all good:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these, one manner is thus: you make three or four cauteries, aligned according to the length of the mouse's back, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand too hard during the entire cautery, and let the patient lie constantly on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another manner of cautery is thus: you heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the heart that is near the mouse's back, where the patient's ribs come towards the left side; and let the elevation with which you lift the heart be according to the size of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, insert the two inflamed edges until the heart is pierced from the other side; then remove the cautery, and thus there will be four of them. And if you see fit, cauterize with a cautery of three edges. After this treatment when he has thrown off corruption for a long time, it is worth more than all the others that we have mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisia
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not beneficial for hydropisia except in the manner called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned earlier in divisions, and your treatment does not help at all, then you must make four cauteries around the throat, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the back, two behind the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the ribs of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the cautery on for a long time to throw off corruption, and do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and recovery will hasten, and both intentions will come together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the one that we have shown earlier, which is like a key; and those for the back are olive-shaped, according to what has been shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in someone who is hydropisia and full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not go too deep inside, so that it might hurt outside the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the calf muscle; and let the cautery be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind it, on the inside of the thigh. Leave the cauteries on for a long time without treating them until the water goes out; afterwards treat with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of epilepsy
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When an intestinal disorder comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been mentioned earlier about the cautery of the stomach, around the belly button. And four small cauteries around the throat, each like a small key cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abounding and the patient suffering greatly, then make one cautery on the point of the chin, one cautery on each ear, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one; for treatment is helpful when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and large cold moist humors that have decayed, and they have been treated according to what we have mentioned earlier, but there is no benefit, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that one which is directly behind the navel and tapers off towards the bottom, and one cautery below the belly button.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the food does not cook properly, and you see swelling of the face, then make one large cautery on the stomach as it was mentioned earlier, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with a key-shaped cautery; leave the cautery on for a long time. Afterwards treat the wound until it is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the fleshy growth called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut off a veinlet, heat the cautery that appears like a razor, then place it completely aflame on that cut vein; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein where blood flows. Do this once or twice; if there is much veinlet, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward, treat with beneficial ointments until they are sound; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an artery, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly-treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, then there comes such a disease that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If a fistula appears and is inflamed and filled with rottenness and corrupted moisture, you should probe it with a subtle tent throughout its entire length, and ensure that you know the full depth of the tent. Afterward, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered; then continue applying the cautery until all the decayed and corrupted flesh is burned away, once, twice, or three times, depending on what is required; but beware of burning nerves that are nearby, as well as large veins. If the fistula reaches the bladder or intestines, be careful in those places, and do not apply the cautery except in a narrow area, and consider it not to be penetrating; afterward, treat the wound until it is healed, and if the wound remains dry and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed. But if the matter has not been removed, know that the wound is too deep and that decayed bone lies at its base; and so one of those we will discuss later.
de la maladie des reins	de la maladie dels rengs (Occitan)
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys and from gross winds, and it does not take on the nature of a woman's menses, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys on both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauteries in a row, and this will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold due to moisture so that the patient retains urine, then perform cautery on the front of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, each cautery being as long as a hazelnut; and also perform one cautery behind the back if needed, or two if necessary; and use the clavicle cautery according to the shape described earlier.
de la marris	Of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist and does not allow conception due to this, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they do come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two cauteries behind the back; and use the clavicle cautery, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hair
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the hair socket and cause it to move from its place, and the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together, and the parting of the hair is found empty; then you must perform cautery on the patient above the hair socket with a circular cautery, encircling the socket as it turns so that the socket is within the circle; and use cauteries similar to those used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not available, then perform three large olive-shaped cauteries and let them be as deep as all the others; and do this until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of pain in the hair
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the hip joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated for this as we have discussed previously but the treatment is ineffective, and the condition is chronic: then you must purge the patient of thick humors using foul-tasting pills or similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	Afterward, perform cauterization; and the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: namely, using medicines together with burning or fire cautery. Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is as follows: you should cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries in this shape, making them deep and wide, and have the space between each cautery be the size of a finger, and make the cauteries olive-shaped. Sometimes, cautery is performed in the middle on top of the hip joint, so there are four cauteries in total according to this shape
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish to perform cautery with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the case of hip joint dislocation, do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip joint, and all the fat around the bone is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the method used in sciatica when pain is felt in the hip joint but does not reach the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient feels the pain and one cautery above the ankle bone on the left side slightly forward; let these cauteries be scalpel-shaped and burn the thickness of the fat. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers' width from the heel, cauterize there using three or four "points" cauteries.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, then make more cauteries; and if the pain is felt below the knee towards the thigh, perform a scalpel-shaped or circular cautery there. Be sure in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who performed cautery on the ankle bone of the foot, leaving it so that the leg became completely swollen and the foot as well; it was pierced and corrupted all over the foot. Afterward, a stomachache led to his death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize one and the other according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	**And let it be heated until it is all red and gleaming hot, then place it on the bad boil, turned towards the sound side; cauterize once with one cautery, leave it three days; afterwards make an emplaster of butter, leave the wound open for a long time; thereafter cure with ointment until it is healed.**
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	**Albucasis says that we use this cautery little for fear of its burning, and few people use it; yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can bear it well.**
de la dolor dou dos	**of the pain in the back**
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or impact or excessive bleeding, or from similar matter spread coldly, in none of these cases does fire cautery help except for that which comes from the infusing of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has been purged with fetid pills or others similar ones, three lines of incisions be made on their back where the pain is felt, and five cauteries or more be applied in each line according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the middle clavicle bone according to this shape:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often occurs in young children, and the sign of its onset is that they have difficulty breathing when lying down and are afraid; and you find on the back spine and on both sides the appearance that comes up over the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize with the cautery of a cell according to this shape:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly. And if you see fit, then cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines deep, and let the points be close together. Afterward, dress the wound until it is healed according to what we have said, and make sure that you do not apply a cautery in spasm of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	de la dolor des jointes
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is caused by moistures that are spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes to the foot, which doctors properly call "podagra," and when it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured by medicines, it is treated by cauterization in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olivary according to this shape:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	"And if there is need that you press upon the face of the foot, make cautery over all the cautery that is called 'point'. And if pains extend to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make cautery upon each knee .iii. cauteries or .iiij. on each side, with all cauteries olive-shaped; and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand longer than until the edge of the heart is burned."
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	"And if the pains extend to the knee and back, let him administer the cautery that we have spoken of in its chapter. And if there are pains in the hands, make pricks around the little finger at two lines; and if there remains any pain in the arms, make pricks upon each joint and upon the hair of the hand; and if the pains extend to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines. For if you give him good care and purge fleume, he shall be healed by the help of God."
de la routure dou syfac	"Of the cutting of the sciatic nerve"
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	"When cutting comes in angles, and the intestines descend to the thighs and it is newly happened, so that when you see him cure it, he should not eat that day; and let him use things that leave the stomach empty, so that the wind descends from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his elbow until the intestines are repaired, and stretch out the sinews to your two fingers, and seize with a pinch below the cut over the bone of the finger, and at one sign which should resemble half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:"
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	"Until it is white and gives forth sparks. Then stretch the intestines back to their place; and let the minister hold his hand upon them so that they do not return backwards; and open well the thighs of the patient, and put beneath him one cushion and one sergeant on each thigh, and another on his chest which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and press it with your right hand until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the intestines do not slip out when you are making the cautery; so that you do not burn them; and that through this the patient does not die or suffer some other harm."
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	"And know that if you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and for large people they should also be large according to their measure; afterwards three days after the place of the cautery should be fomented with butter until the blistering is removed; afterwards cure him with other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his diet be restricted so that the intestines do not slip out when he gets up to go to chambers."
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	"And after forty days, when he wants to get up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and let him wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and be careful of excess in drinking and eating, and of raising his voice too high; and when he follows this teaching, then he is entirely healed. And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in its chapter."
de la routure dou ventre	"de la routure du ventre"
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known,
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But mark first the point of entry and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand amidst all the cautery with a key-shaped tool. But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of past pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain occurs in any limb from falling or striking it, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure with medicine does not work, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness, weakness, strength, location, twists, and severity of pain. If the first cautery is sufficient, that's good; but if not, repeat one more cautery on top of it, for it is customary for the cautery to be moved close to the affected limb. Therefore, you must continue with the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of bonesetting
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The menses are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see someone cauterizing, be careful if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the illness, then make five cauteries on top: one in the middle of the forehead, and another towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the back of the head; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape from them; and cauterize on the muscle according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the bonesetting is spread out everywhere and it clearly appears, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on top of the head, and one on the nape of the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the ribcage and another near it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are located on the back of the calf; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cauteries you make, the greater help you give and the more profit it brings; and know that the sick person does not feel any pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already completely corrupted. And the cauteries should be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of the irons. Afterward, cure the place with flour of millet with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
de enfleure	Here is how to treat inflammation:
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	"When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not yet gone, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size; let the cautery be slightly penetrating into the flesh around the heart. Then treat it with ointments until it is gone. Sometimes a cautery is also performed on the hand, foot, back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed. Nevertheless, no one should undertake this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body."
de albaras	"of Albarus"
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When the disease called 'albaras' has begun and medical remedies are of no avail, then cauterize it with a slightly penetrating cautery according to the amount of flesh around the heart until the whiteness is removed and its color changes. Then treat it with flour of vetch and lentils mixed with rose oil, plantain leaves, pigeon's blood, and almond milk, each in equal parts; mix everything together, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it heals."
li cure de chancre par cautere	"Treatment of Chancres by Cautery"
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When a chancre appears at the beginning and you see it stop, cauterize it with a cautery that resembles one circle, all around the edge of the chancre. But also, learned people say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; but this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen before. And it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called 'circule', as we have said concerning many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati", which takes a long time to heal, either because of the excess it causes or because of the water in the patient's body when they are elderly (that is, too old) and have little blood, or because of the weather; if you see that it is hastening to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries in prickling fashion; afterward, leave it thus. For it will hasten to heal itself
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that it is piercing all the way through the cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced through to the heart, and make the cauteries such that the patient feels drawn toward them in such a way that the course of corruption is relieved. Afterward, treat him until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment of fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of illness exists which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a devouring of limb, for it consumes limbs just as fire consumes dry logs. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the small and large awl-shaped cauteries according to what is necessary for the place where the disease is located; afterward, cauterize all around until you have removed all corruption, so that nothing remains of it, and everything that is corrupted has been taken away. And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places powdered with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all corruption. Afterward, treat with fleshing ointments. And if after three days healthy flesh does not appear, it is good; but if not, then recommence the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places. And this devouring has sometimes been cured with hot medicine in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure with hot medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Very often, a disease called "callus" according to our understanding comes on the feet from without, and it is a large, flawed thing that bleeds on the foot. And there are two ways of cautery for this disease: fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are turned by defluxion away from the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you must bring cautery of hot water there; and it is done thus: take a tube of brass or iron, or a feather of a goose, and place it upon the nail and the cuticle, that is to say for warts. And place the tube upon so that it encompasses all around, then put some hot water within, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the tube comes to the root of the nail, and may find the deep path of the hot water even unto the root; and let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour. Then leave it thus, and it will deroot itself entirely with all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you have derooted all those that are on the body, then dress them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone is trembling from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [cause], you must perform four cauteries on them: two between each spine on the back, one at the foot, and one on the stomach near the navel. This will cause the trembling to cease and their health to be restored from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	For pus-filled pustules that smell bad
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes it appears on the body, bathing hot, or putrid pustules, which come from large corrupt matters. So when they first appear, one should perform cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, of which the point is held in fire, or of long Aristolochia root, or lenticular cautery. And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further from then on, but the superfluities whence they come are disrupted, and they become clean; however, this should be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from without, or at the incision of the boil, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, so you should quickly put your two index fingers on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is pacified beneath your fingers, and that no drop comes out; then put on fire several olive cauteries both small and large until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, so take quickly another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stopped, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tying with a strong thread, or by medicines put on that have power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and tightened appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Which will bring about stopping of bleeding is tying very tightly with rags or putting hot things on top, or similar things, if it profits little or not at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or medicine present, so he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press very hard until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped; and then do afterwards what is necessary with cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the surgeries of wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or with burning medicine, and the cauteries, their causes and instruments and forms; and I have put that chapter at the beginning down to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that one can find more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this one, dear friend, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there are many times evacuations of blood when opening the vein and cutting on an aposteme and in treating wounds and extracting splinters and cutting on stone, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many people die from it.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	"Yet I advise you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come seeking treatment, some who have become so attached to their illness that they die easily due to the frenzy they find in their disease, and from the severity of their ailment; one must fear these."
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	"And there are those who give their sense and say: 'Wait, I am healed'; yet the disease is deceitful. It does not behoove you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not open foolishly, but wisely, concerning those of whom you are certain, and from whom you may have taken and received praise; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients toward their recovery, and this will help you achieve good reputation, glory, and the memory of praise."
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	"Dear son, May Our Lord grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if it pleases Him to inspire you with the holy breath of His hand, Amen."
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"I have arranged this chapter in sections for you to consider, according to what is before the chapter on cupping, which I have outlined from beginning to end, so that you may find more easily what you will need."
dou chief plein d’aigue	"full head of water"
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the mother holds the child's head too tightly; sometimes it happens due to some unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and in all those that I saw the bite healed quickly; therefore it seems to me that it is best to leave such cures alone.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the swelling increased each day so that it could not be supported; and the moisture became so great that it burst, and this moisture collected beneath the bone above the spine, between the heart and the bone; and the operation is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the swellings are small, you should cut a gash in the head, wide enough; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture may run out. And here is the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture has grown more and the swelling is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs that the angles of the head are raised on each side, and water flows out when you press it with your hand from within, and this has not been answered: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. Afterward, compress the incisions with bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on them, and leave it thus for five days; then untie it, and dress the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be bound evenly, and give the sick person dry food of broth made from the moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you observe where the swelling of the aposteme and the gathering of water appear; for sometimes it appears before, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the aposteme appears and the gathering of water, and make the incision according to what you can manage; but be careful not to cut an artery; for if it bleeds, then the sick person dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	de reume
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "catarrach" in the ears or the nostril, and the disease is chronic, and treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort is to use cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you cut the veins, it is necessary that the sick person leans back their head; after that, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then wrap the sick person's neck tightly with one cloth; after that, observe where the vein runs, and the places of both are behind the ears, and close to each other; then mark the places with ink, then cut both with a sharp spatula in two parts, so that the incision comes down to the bone, and is as wide as the breadth of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also like two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood flows out continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not appear to be felt, then you must measure the quantity of space between three fingers, then mark with ink and cut down to the bone; and this is how much blood should come out: six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the sick person can tolerate, and the fullness of the artery. Then examine the wound: if there remains a point of the syphac on the bone, then cut it off so that no aposteme comes from it; afterward compress the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When chronic migraine comes with severe catarrh and moisture from tears, and heat in the temples, along with long-standing madness and similar things, and even though medical treatments are used, none of them help, then cut the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the sick person leans back their head and observes the artery that appears in the temple, for it beats visibly, but may be less so in some people who are too cold. And if it is hidden, then the sick person wraps their neck with several cloths; then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and rinses the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery; then lift it up with forceps and separate it well from the tissues that are underneath each part. And if the artery is small, turn it with the point of the nail, then cut off one part according to the quantity of two fingers' width. For if it is not cut, then all the blood will not flow out completely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	"And draw six ounces of blood, up to three. And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong doubled silk thread, so that putrefaction does not come before the wound closes, and there are no bloody discharges; then cut away the excess that is between the two ties at this very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize with the cutting cautery up to the bone until the head is severed. And this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion."
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery helps to finish off moisture: therefore it is more helpful for dampness.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made dressings; and when they are untied, care should be taken to cure them with dry medicines which cause flesh to grow, and dressings, until they heal. And if blood flows from the artery every time you work there, then hurry to cauterize with the cutting cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the blood stops flowing; and if this is not present, then put your thumb on the place until the blood congeals, and wash the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and constrain it as necessary. And what is masterful and easier for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein of this cutting cautery in two places, but let the cuts be well spaced to preserve their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the material is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there must be one inch of space between the two knives, and then when you have marked with a hot iron on both places, and you measure the glowing iron so that it comes up to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be distant between the two cuts because this cautery is not continuous throughout. And this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears flow from the veins that are above the forehead of a fever patient, and there is no profit from any medicine applied there, and you see the face of the sick person reddening, and feel on the forehead a trembling as if from shivering; and if the eyebrows are thin and moist so that the hairs of the paper (eyelids) fall out, and the eyelids are heated and burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called this treatment in the past "concussion cure," and it is done by making three incisions on the forehead of the patient with this illness who has hair there: one incision as long as two fingers in the middle of the forehead going downwards towards the nose, and the other two incisions are each two fingers apart above the eyelids, and take care not to cut the arteries that are located at both sides above the eyelids; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the size of three fingers wide.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have ready a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then take the spatula heated in two places as shown here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is drawn from the temple to the second incision; and scrape away all the heart that is between the two slits up to the soft tissue that is on the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spongy material.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the tool called "cultellarium" into the first slit, it is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side. This is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And direct the cutting edge of the tool towards the flesh near the heart, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle slit. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head down to the feet so that the incision is continuous right up to where the heart opens, and then do likewise in the middle slit up to the other side; and then drain out the blood evenly, and press the area to stop any bleeding. Then place a bandage of soft cotton in each slit, and cover it with cloths moistened in wine, oil, and rue, and make sure that no pus forms there; and on the third day untie the stitches, and apply a great quantity of watercress, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	This is an extract from "Le Grand Chirurgie" by Guy de Chauliac
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	If it happens that catarrh comes on suddenly, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakening of sight, and burned papers, and hair falling out, and there is deep pain in the head, and the sick person sneezes; then know by these signs that those matters and that catarrh come from many veins, and the cure for it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And the treatment is to make the patient lie on their back, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another one wide enough. 1 inch. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when eating; and once the bone is uncovered, wipe out all the blood with a sponge, and then open up between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen bandages there. Then tie on top cloths moistened in wine and oil, and make sure no hot abscess forms; when it has healed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to form, then treat it with drying agents that encourage flesh growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster out of it. And apply it to these wounds to encourage flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The term "estoupement des oreilles" translates to "stopping up the ears." Here is an example of how this phrase might be used in context:
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When a stone falls into the ear or some other thing that does not fit in the ear nor grows there, then place the ear towards the sun. If you see the stone, then distill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then use tweezers for extraction; and when the sneeze occurs, make him sneeze with condition, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and wrap around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear above. Many times fire comes from this treatment; and if it does not come from fire, then extract the stone with fine tweezers, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with tweezers, that's good. If not, then extract with a fine, small hook; and if it does not come out with this, make a reed of straw and stick the end of the reed into the earhole hard, and stop what is around the reed with soft wax so that wind cannot enter with the reed; then blow fire strongly, for often fire comes thus as we have said; and if it does not come from fire in such manner, take glutinous substance which birds use, and put some of it on an instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glut on the stone or whatever thing it may be, and blow fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before inflammation and spasm comes, and the manner of cutting is thus: first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein according to his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small crescent-shaped incision in the root of the ear where it hangs; and let the incision be as large as you can get to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and continue the treatment until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one thin, subtle spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	"Make an incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have cut off many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and tongs, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy."
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	"Therefore, when water flows into the ear, the patient must use sneezing first and plug the ear with plenty of cotton. And they should lie on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out by itself, that's good. But if not, take many pieces according to the length of your thin and light fingers, heat them a little over the fire; and the patient puts one into the hole of his ear, and sticks out on the other side, and puts another piece on top of the piece that is in the ear; and keep doing this from piece to piece until all the water comes out, and thus it should all come out; And if you see, take a reed and put one end into the ear, and hold the other end near the fire until the end of the reed is burned; then repeat with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about the pieces."
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	"For the removal of the animal, if it is small-bodied like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is large-bodied and can be felt, bring tweezers for its removal; this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear."
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	"For the removal of earthworms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the chapter on distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms are visible, remove them with fine tweezers; but if they are not visible, take the tube made of this shape:"
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	"And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle end into the ear according to the size of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly on the entire tube; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they refuse to come out, stuff cotton around the tube as I have said in the chapter on stones; and if they still do not come out as we have said, bring distillation remedies that ancient doctors have proven effective against worms, which you will find in the chapter on distillations; and use this instrument to distill your oils and medicines into the ear, of which this is the shape as you see:"
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	"And let it be made of silver or thin brass with a small hole below and wide above for distillation. And for pressing inside the distillation, use an instrument well-made for this purpose. And if you wish to take one razor and wrap cotton around its tip carefully; then pour your oil or juice into the tube along with whatever medicine you desire, and place the tube in the ear. Then insert the razor with all the cotton into the ear and press gently with your hand until the oil is distilled into the ear. And warm the patient's ear beforehand, and let the distillation be done in a small pot warmed over the fire before being distilled into the ear; and make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be as effective."
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Chapter: "The Stopping of the Ears"
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; and the same applies to adults due to injury or flesh grown inside the ear, which sometimes goes deep into the ear so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is one little opening that can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes deep inside so that it cannot be seen is difficult to treat in many cases. And in the case where there is an opening visible, you should place the patient's ear towards the sun and look inside: if you see any polyp appearing, then perform the operation described below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	"And let it be sharp and cutting both before and behind, full, so that it does not wound the ear; if the prolapse is of flesh born in the body of the ear, hold it with fine forceps and cut it lightly, until all that flesh is removed."
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	"And if the prolapse is deeply within the ear, take a fine, sharp razor and heat it slightly over fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the prolapse where the patient feels pain in their hearing, pierce it lightly, taking care not to injure the nerves of the ear; then place a gauze according to the width of the opening into the ear, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment."
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Continue this process for several days until the wound is healed. Then take a gauze and moisten it in rose water, powdered vitriol, and apply it. If you see swelling of the ear, then remove the gauze and replace it with another gauze moistened in cerote made from rose oil and wax, until the swelling has gone down; then cure it until it is healed."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	"And if there is discharge of blood, take a sponge and wring it out in cold water, then place it on the ear. Use other remedies that stop the discharge of blood, which are found in treatises on distillations."
de la char des papieres	"What is written on the paper"
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	"This is the remedy that comes from paper of the eyes when they are moist and dried out. It is necessary to stretch them with tweezers and forceps, then cut it with a scalpel at its roots; then apply powdered vitriol."
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	"And if a thread of blood oozes out, then cauterize it with a lenticular cautery and cut it afterwards. This is more effective than cauterizing first. And often repeat this process until there is nothing left of its roots; for when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back."
de la gresle	"Hailstorm"
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	"Many times pieces of paper come with things like hailstones in their shape and hardness, and therefore this disease is called 'hail'; it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below. The treatment is as follows: ensure that the hail does not move from one side to the other, which is easy to know; then make an incision wide enough, then carefully scrape each part, then take it with tweezers and cut it. If you cannot cut it without piercing the paper a little, it doesn't matter for the patient; and if the crack is large, stitch it up and heal it until it is healthy; but if it is small, do not use force, as ointments will restore it quickly and inwardly."
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	"And if the hail is descending into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and grasp the hail with tweezers and cut it on both sides; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter; and when the hail has been cut, rinse the wound with salt water, and heal it inwardly until the patient is healthy."
de la graisse des eulz	Here's a possible translation for "de la graisse des eulz":
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Eosinach is a substance that enters into the fabrics of papers above, and this happens more in children than in adults, greatly afflicting their eyes; it brings them catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; therefore they often lie on their faces and sleep like that, and their papers are under their eyebrows wet with fluid, making the swelling and appearance covered with eosinach which opens into the eye. And when you press below there with your fingers, you feel the eosinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of removing it is as follows: the patient puts his head in your hand; then takes one linen cloth and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains eosinach from each part, then places it on top; and presses with his fingers on both sides so that the eosinach is gathered within the circle; then makes in the middle of the moistness with the sharp spatula a cut as wide as the wound made when bloodletting, and cuts the skin deeply until you reach the eosinach; and in several positions comes out eosinach from the cut, resembling the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take out with one piece of lint gripped between your fingers behind, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure that you do not stuff in the cut, but wipe all the spatula up to the eye without cutting or hurting it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if eosinach does not come out at the beginning of the cut, then gently widen the cut a little until it appears; then remove it as we have said above, then moisten cloths in hot water and cold water, and place them on the wound, and press with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are men among them who grind salt and place it on the wound to corrupt the moisture that remains; then treat it until it is healed. And if a hot ulcer forms at the wound, then treat it with soothing emplasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hairs from the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs appear on the papers mixed with others than their natural ones and are entwined, they harm the eyes and cause diseases such as habitual tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, to such an extent that it causes destruction of the eyes. And there are four ways to treat it: either by cauterization with fire together or by hot medicine according to what is before or after cautery, and it can be done either by incision and suturing or by tweezers, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper from the eye with your left hand; if it is folded over, that is good; if not, then insert a needle with one thread on top. And whether it is near the edge of the paper or where the hairs are growing near those hairs, and pull one thread upwards along the entire length of the paper, and turn it towards the razor; then make an incision underneath the paper, below the hairs attached, with the spatula cutting from the large pupil to the small one. Then remove one thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and cloth under the paper, then press on the paper in the shape of a cone, like a mortar pestle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity that you see lifting up the paper which is divided into two parts.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	"Then for those who need it, cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened; then make a cut all along the lines that you have marked on both sides, and start from the larger line towards the smaller one; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs, as thick as a root; then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the heart, then pull it through entirely; then join the two lips with a stitch using a needle with one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the superfluous threads stick together on both sides with any sticky substance if you see this being done; but if not, do not worry about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days; then dress the wound without stitching using dry and constricting substances, because paper revives at the joining of the wound and its assembly, but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), and this is done without fear."
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	"And if there is another way to do this: And it is that you mark the paper with a shape like the leaf of a myrtle, as we have described, with three points diverging according to the shape shown below:"
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	"Then cut that which is above the small forces equally according to the shape shown below:"
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	"And if you lack power to hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with one thread, and place it within the figure; and place another thread beside the large ear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads evenly; then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin upon which you have marked, as we have explained, then approximate the two lips of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is sound; and if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments."
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	"And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper become inverted. In such case, you must use what we have said about incision; but the suturing in one and the other is more complicated."
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	"The treatment of the canals is as follows: Convert the paper and make the slit within it according to what I have said, then make two fine canals by art equal in length to that of the paper and the width of the spatula; cut at both ends where you hold the threads. Then join one thread evenly onto that which lies above the paper of the eye, and strain both canals tightly from both parts; leave it thus for several days, and the skin that is strained will harden, darken, and shrivel until it adheres."
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	"If it takes too long, cut it with some force, and treat it until it is sound; and when the wound is healed, and the paper has been removed, the hairs will no longer point; this is the form of the two canals that you should make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:"
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The operation is as follows: Take a fine needle and thread it with one thin, soft silk thread; then join the ends and tie them evenly, making the length of the threads a palm's breadth. Then take another short, fine silk thread and tie its end to the threads; then the patient should place his head in your hand, and be near the sun so that the operation may be clearly seen, for it is a delicate and subtle one. Then insert the needle throughout the canal into the root of the hair, joining it, and pierce it quickly through the paper until you draw it out above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the canal, and place it in the canal if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come out of the canal into the paper with the natural hair."
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	"And if the canal is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the canal downward along all the thread that you have ordered, until the canal comes out of the hole above and you can see it through the vision of the eye; then pull out the canal and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair settles in its place and flesh grows over it. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long natural eyebrow hair, and raise it with that one which you leave, until it is separated and then lift it."
de la porriture de l’oil	"Treatment of eye inflammation"
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called 'aleacrati' or decay comes to the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from an incision or cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of working on it is that you should cut this joint and open its lips, and put linen wicks inside, and leave them until it heals; and you should not use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. For if you do so, the illness returns worse than before; but rather use softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or altar water and linseed cooked, and applications of diacylon melted in some oil, and wrap it with a wick, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you should take care that it does not heal in its former shape; and these works that we have mentioned serve only to prevent this illness from returning in its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is underneath is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound or cut and cautery and things similar; and the way of working on it is that you should take a needle with one doubled thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid so far to the right that the threads come out in two holes of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut it with one broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and twist the paper, and make two cuts on either side within the paper; and let the holes of the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of the letter "gamma" in Greek; then remove that flesh according to the quantity that its sides are gone underneath, from what covers the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a wool thread; then treat it as we have said with softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make one full cut underneath the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said; and one should do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters arrange various devices with all their power to make the figure return to its natural shape; and the sick person himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soldering occurs in many men in such a way that the paper above is stuck with egg white, and cannot move nor perform its natural tasks, then you must insert the point of a razor below the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with forceps until you cut what is attached to the spatula's tip, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient can bear it if the spatula is too sharp or cuts the eye; and let your incision, from which you scrape off this assembly, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes they make in the eye salted water, and lift it with fresh water and collyrium; then place a linen bandage between the paper and the eye, and put wet wool moistened in egg yolk on top of the eye; and after the third day use collyrium and compresses until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the angle of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the angle is of two kinds: one is nervous and resembles a hard, dry skin, and another which is not nervous but resembles moist, congealed skin, such that when touched with iron and tried to grasp with forceps, it cannot be done; both of these semblances begin towards the large tear gland and gradually increase until they cover all of the eye's vision and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is as follows: the patient puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then grasp the angle with small-forceps double, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and put one horsehair or cow hair or ox hair on it, along with some strong thread; and double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the angle, and pierce through with the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and stretch it up, and scrape off all around the angle that surrounds the pupil and the sclera up to the top, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear gland using the spatula subtly and small-forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the tear gland so that by the incision tears do not flow in their accustomed manner; and sometimes stretch the angle with tweezers only, and thread, as we have said; then scrape it off entirely with a soft spatula.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the delicate tissue and break it, nor pierce the pupil; and after the incision sprinkle some crushed celandine into the eye, and use collyrium made of litargire, leaving it overnight; then cure with whatever is appropriate until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the angle is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle and tweezers cannot enter, this semblance of angle is often cured with medicines; and as I have described in the division, it appears that there are several kinds, and if you see one cut open, then open the eye of the patient and take a light spatula slightly bent in this manner:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently lift the angle upwards and if it does not seem to thin out and you see that the reason persists, then distill from your mouth into the eye collyrium made of litargire and red collyrium and crushed celandine, and stop up the eye overnight; then recommence the other operation according to this same manner until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is any obstacle in the eye that prevents you from operating, such as a hot aposteme, then use milk first and cure the hot aposteme until it is healed; then recommence the operation as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the tear gland causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with tweezers and cut off a part of it but not all, so that tears do not flow there; then distill red collyrium made of litargire into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And about the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Sometimes in the eyes of some people red flesh grows and covers the pupil and restrains upon the papers and turns towards the forehead, resembling a pomegranate flower; and the operation is thus: the patient puts their head in your hand, then opens their eyes and grasp all that flesh with suitable tweezers and holds it firm with forceps; then cut off the first layer of flesh and continue cutting until finished, taking care not to wound the eye during the operation; and let the incision be made by the spatula which we have mentioned in the incision of the angle and use small-forceps to remove the sebaceous material, as shown in the figure below.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with crushed celandine or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines into it, and put cotton soaked in egg yolk on the front of the eye so that it is secure from hot aposteme; and if anything remains and hot inflammation arises and you suspect a hot aposteme, then leave the eye alone and cure the hot aposteme with things that calm hot aposteme; then return to your operation until it is healed, and do likewise for any flesh that grows in the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each weak eye by the natural way; and by the artificial way, in surgical operation with iron tools; and do not put your hand into any of these operations unless you see that these members are able to withstand this operation.
des voines des eulz	And about the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The veins that are red and cover the eye are called sebaceous veins, which hinder vision and weaken the eye every day. It is therefore necessary at first to examine whether the eye in which sebaceous veins are present is healthy, and if there is no other visible disease besides sebaceous veins; then grasp them in this manner: tell the patient to put their head in your hand, then suspend those veins with tweezers according to your judgment, using double-ended subtly bent tweezers in this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And hold two tweezers by degrees on one body according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully squeeze those delicate veins,
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all this in one hour, then apply a plaster to the eye of things that alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for several days until the pain is alleviated and an abscess is formed, then resume according to this method which is stated beforehand until he is healed; and this is the form of the treatment:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Physicians call a "fistula" an "arissati": when you cure it with cautery and with medicine that is hot and burning according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is treachery in it. You must cut open the abscess where it must burst, and draw out all the moisture that is inside until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, then bring everything from the instruments that are present here according to this form; it is called "aspre chief" (sharp knife) and should be made of iron with a point like a chisel as shown in its current form
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the site of the corrupted bone, then twist it between your fingers and press with your hand until you know that all the corruption has been removed. Do this several times, then return the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the site is healed and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is healed, and remains like this for forty days, and it does not renew itself nor form an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed. But if not, then there is no other recourse but to bring back the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this method: you must uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take one drill in this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be attenuated up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the eye socket and hold your hand away from the eye a little bit, then twist the drill until it pierces the bone and you feel that the sick person's breath comes out. Then return to the site with drying medicines as I have taught you, and when flesh grows and the site hardens, then the matter will go to the nose. This is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	About the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eye opens entirely and nothing disturbs it nor diminishes its size, then you must bind the patient. Then rinse the eye, then place cupping glasses or hot jars without burning to suck out matter, then put on the eye a linen made of aloe, acacia, incense, and sarcocolle, then strain the eye with bandages and cloths in this manner: take soft cloths, double each one four times, then place them on top of each other according to how much the eye needs; then strain it with a firm bandage from above, then restart the cupping glasses to suck without burning. Then remove the cups and leave the eye strained day and night. If the linen moistens too much, you must change it often. Then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see that the eye is improving, that's good; but if not, then restart the bandage and linen and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	About the bursting of an ocular vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption occurs in the ocular vein and opens up and paper comes out like a grain of resin, it is frightful to see. Then if you want to cover it, the procedure is as follows: take a needle and pierce it into the root of the part below until it reaches the part above, then take another needle with one doubled thread from the part by the eye socket; pierce this through and leave the first needle in place according to its position. Then sew up the site with the doubled thread and tie one part of the vein around it and strain it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye damp linen soaked in egg albumen. Leave it until the thread sticks with the vein, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is restrained by the vein on each side with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye becomes greatly inflamed, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes out from the back of the eye and corrects the moisture of the albuginous humor and lets the eye descend, and enter into it quickly. Then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	About the brow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This ailment called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a vein that has assembled in the eye, resembling descending water, yet it is not water; and the manner of its appearance during operation is thus: Make the patient sit on one prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move the muffler until you see the vein rise up towards your eyes; then prick it in with a needle, and do not allow it to descend nor let any light enter, and have the patient view things as they used to. And if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the vein is not aligned as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula and cut through the corneal cloth one point along the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown until the vein comes out; and when it has come out, distill warm water mixed with honey into the eye, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and mixed with honey, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Water of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the likenesses of waters in division, and those which it is necessary to pierce; so we do according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and close the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right; then place the point of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a thread in that blenchor of the eye at the part towards the lesser lacrimal, then push the instrument called "almagda" gently and turn your hand until it pierces into the blenchor of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be to the depth of the measure of the space which is from the pruneole until the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the corneal cloth, and then place the instrument up to where the water is, then press it down one way after another. If the water descends now, then the patient sees before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, if the water rises along the second way, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and does not rise, then withdraw almagda gently by turning your hand little by little; then put back into the water a bit of red silk, and remove from this eye inside. Then place over the eye compresses or moistened wool in rose oil and egg yolk, and tie with the healthy eye. Nowadays, we and those of our time place over it finely crushed cummin with egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce only the conjunctiva and not too deep, but make a subtle cut, then place almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a pleasant bed, on which he sleeps on his back in two dark rooms; and let him be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be tied according to his condition up to the third day; then untie him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then retie him for seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you do this, because the water rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If any inflammation occurs, then untie the eye before the seventh day, and apply to it the remedy for soothing inflammation; and when it is soothed, then uncover the sight and place on its face a compress to cover it for some days, and let him remain in that same dark room. And then let him come out little by little, and turn back to his house; and know that no disciples should meddle with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Jericho, who told us that in some country they make almagda pierce the eye, from which they suck out the water, but nevertheless I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them, and they should be made of pure silver:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	"And their heads of these same subtlety are two, and one behind has three angles."
de la char sor le neis	"of the flesh on the bones"
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	"Sometimes various flesh joints are born on the bones, some of which resemble scorpions with many feet. And there are some where the flesh is colored like fire, and there is soft flesh of bone color. Therefore, in that flesh which is soft and not fiery-colored, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and apply oil to those joints and rub them vigorously. Then cut off as much as you can hold with the spatula with its sharp edge on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed."
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	"And if there remains anything that cannot be cut off, then open it with one of the light and sharp instruments so that nothing remains. And if it swells or becomes inflamed, then treat it as is necessary; but if it is malignant swelling, then hurry and cauterize until the blood stops flowing, and all the flesh has been removed, then apply oil or vinegar to the bones."
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	"If the bone opens and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healthy. But if moisture does not reach as it should, know that there is newborn flesh in the bone above; then the instrument will not come for cutting: therefore you must take a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and wet your hands with it, and have between each knot a doit or less. And the patient puts the head of the thread into his nose with some force, and draws it in smelling until it comes through the nostril into the mouth; children at school often do this, and it is easy for whoever wishes to do it. Then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know which ones are on the thread in turning towards you. Do this until you know that the knots have rotted that flesh; then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten it in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corrupted all that remains of the flesh. Then put a bandage of plaster on it for some days until it is healed; if it needs drying medicines, use them. And this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the nostrils:"
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	"And it should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp like a tube with its conduit likewise; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and the instrument full for purging the head; and let there be many holes at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid."
de la char sor le neis	To remove flesh from the nostrils
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	"Often there appears on the head of the nostril a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large so that it is visible to look at; therefore you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of it, then put on it the cautery or the burning medicine. And if one waits too long to cut it until it has become large, take care if it is hard, of dark color, and poor sense; do not touch it with iron for it is an engrained swelling, because when it is cut, great mischief comes upon the patient. But if the swelling is soft to touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be completely cut off, then empty the nostril and cut it without fear, and cure it afterwards with drying and restrictive things."
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nostril is cut and cauterized
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Know that when a fissure occurs in one of these cartilages it profits little, except in some men. Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, you should see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew up the two lips with stitches, and cure it until it is healed. But if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must cauterize all the parts of their skin until they are dry, then sew up the two lips together with stitches, and tighten them, and sprinkle over them powder of dragon's blood and crushed incense; and put over the powders a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster, and let it adhere for some time, then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	"The manner of stitching is that you sew the wound together: either with needles, as we have said in abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I have told you."
des apostemes des levres	Of the swellings on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men have within their lips hard abscesses, resembling grains of millet, small and large. Therefore, you must turn the lips, cut into each nodule, grasp it with forceps and cut it in every part; then apply powdered vitriol after the incision until the blood is stanched. Then apply the ointment of Aesculapius, and dress the area with dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times fleshy growths appear on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; you must hold them with forceps and cut at their root, allowing the vein or blood to run; then apply powdered vitriol or other restrictive and drying powders to the wound; if this flesh grows back after the incision, which happens often, then cut it again and cauterize it: it will not return after the cautery. These are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes escarps appear at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and sharp; sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish-green and worms come to the gum, causing foulness; therefore you must make the patient sit between your hands with their face in your lap and scrape away at the escarps until nothing remains; do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other stains until they are all removed; if what caused them is removed first, that is good; otherwise restart on the second day and continue on the third until everything has been scraped off; know that teeth require various forms of instruments for scraping according to the task at hand, as those used to scrape between teeth differ from those used to scrape around them; have all these forms and others ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating a toothache, it is necessary to wait before extracting until the pain has ceased, for one should never perform such an operation while the patient is in pain. For it is a delicate matter that requires great skill and offers no excuse for failure.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore, when the patient is suffering from a toothache, it is necessary for you to be certain about which tooth is causing the pain. Many times the pain may seem to be coming from a healthy tooth, and the patient might have it extracted believing that will relieve their pain; however, the pain does not disappear after this incorrect extraction, as we have seen happen too many times already. Therefore, once you are certain about which tooth is causing the pain, make sure to scrape all around it with a sharp spatula to protect the gum on all sides. Then grasp the tooth firmly with your fingers or use forceps to apply pressure gently at first, until the tooth is well loosened; then secure the forceps tightly and hold the patient's chin in your lap between your knees so that they cannot move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out easily, use any of these instruments and insert them gently into each side of the socket, wiggling them as you did before. If the tooth is pierced and movable, you must fill in the hole with wadding where the piercing is located; then extract it carefully with forceps so that it does not break during extraction; afterwards, work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Be sure not to break the tooth during extraction and be aware that leaving even a small piece behind can cause greater pain for the patient due to the root remaining. Beware of acting like ignorant surgeons who, in their haste and recklessness, sometimes break the socket and fail to follow the procedures we have described. They often cause serious illness by leaving roots or breaking the socket, as we have seen happen many times before. Once the tooth is extracted, rinse the area with wine, vinegar, water, or saltwater; if bleeding occurs, which is common, sprinkle powdered vitriol on the wound; if that does not work, cauterize it with a hot iron.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments used to extract teeth should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting a tooth. These are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	"And let them be of heavy members so they do not bend at all during the pulling, and let them be of good iron well-made, and let them have teeth for holding moves."
de la racine des dens	"from the root of the teeth"
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the tooth, then you must place on the wound cotton moistened in butter for one or two days until the area is softened, then insert the pliers called "algefri," making them inside like a file, this is the form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali," that is, tweezers, this is the form.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out, this is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, these forms come later.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument which has two handles, this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are placed on the surface of the teeth, and this instrument resembles large pliers, here is its form
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these instruments should be strong enough not to break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted. And the wise master finds his instrument himself according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if one breaks one's cart or other bones where it could be useful, then one searches among the instruments that are necessary, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, this is its form
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and hold well to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can grasp and remove it. Then restore the place with appropriate medicine, and if there is rot in the bone and it is small, then remove it with all this instrument
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to their natural shape, and their form is ugly, especially in young women, then you must know if the tooth is close behind the tooth and not in its proper place, and one cannot set it right or file it: then scrape it; and if it is against the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak and has iron pointed at the end
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And gently tap with your hand every day for the hardness of the tooth and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent so that one can file it, then use a file like this whose form is like
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used to make needles. And gently file the tooth little by little every day so that it does not move too much until it falls out. Then smooth it at the end with any plane and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file off its sharpness until it is even enough not to cut the tongue nor corrupt speech
quant li dent lochent	When teeth lock
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When front teeth are locked together, either from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without it hurting, and you have treated them with constricting medicines but they don't work, then you must constrict them with a gold wire because silver wire turns green and decays. And let the wire be medium size neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth. If you see that the teeth are crooked, take the wire and double-ended pliers between the two healthy teeth, then insert the ends between the loose teeth if there is one or more until you carefully reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then start covering it again up to where you started, and hold your hand gently and steadily so that they do not move. And let your knot be at the root of the tooth so that it does not escape. Then cut off the ends of the wire with pliers and join them together between the healthy tooth and insert it in such a way that it does not hurt the tongue. And then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose or the wire breaks, then tighten it with another wire. It will last like this all its time, here is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two loose ones as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it should be replaced in its place little by little as we have said. And only those who are wise and skilled should undertake this task, and sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow bone and put it in the place where there is a gap and tighten it with wire as we have described, and it will remain in place for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the frenulum of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes the frenulum of the tongue is present at birth or due to an injury from a wound. The procedure is as follows: open the patient's mouth and have them tilt their head back while you lift their tongue with your finger. Then cut the nerve with scissors along the frenulum until the tongue is completely released from its attachment. If there is hardness or callus present, due to a healed wound, use an needle and cut along the frenulum. Be careful not to cut too deeply so as not to harm the artery below. After cutting, rinse the area with rose water and sage or cold water and place a linen bandage underneath the tongue each night to prevent reattachment of the frenulum. If bleeding occurs, sprinkle powdered vitriol on the wound. If bleeding continues, cauterize it with a gentle cautery iron, then treat the wound with other appropriate remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of dusky color or black or hard, but the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is a chancre. And if it tends to become an ulcer and there is moisture present, then use a needle and make a small incision with a sharp scalpel and remove it from both sides. If bleeding occurs during your procedure, sprinkle powdered vitriol until it stops bleeding. Then continue your procedure until all the flesh is removed. Then rinse the area with sage and honey and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes swellings called "godaths" appear in the throat, which are properly called "aphthae," and there are two types. If they are hard, dark-colored, and of small size, do not touch them with an iron instrument. If they are red and have a large root, do not touch them with an iron instrument either, especially if bleeding is present. Instead, wait until they burst on their own. If they are white, rounded, and have a fine root, then prepare your instruments to cut them out, but first make sure that the swelling is warm and calm. Then have the patient sit facing the sun with their head in your lap, and have them open their mouth while you insert your fingers between their teeth and press down on their tongue with your other hand, as shown below. Use a thin, sharp instrument made of silver or brass:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue against all this instrument? And when you see the boil, take the lancet and insert it into the head of it, and twist it up above as much as you can; then draw out some of the cloth with it, and cut off the instrument, of which here is the shape, resembling a crow's foot; and its ends are curved, one towards the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then use pincers, of which here is the shape
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and pointed on the other; and when you have cut off one of the kernels, then cut off the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle with hot water and salt-water, and if there is any bleeding, gargle with water in which pomegranate skins have been cooked, or myrtle leaves, or similar things, until the blood is stanched; then treat it until it is healed. And sometimes other boils appear in the throat besides the two kernels, so cut them off likewise as you would the two kernels.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman who had a boil that had grown inside her throat, specifically one small boil; it had almost completely closed off her throat so that she could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if left like this for one or two days. The boil had grown so much that there were already two needles stuck through its two openings. I therefore acted quickly, and inserted a lancet into one of them, then twisted it outward and drew out a large portion of bile; then I repeated the procedure on the other opening of the boil, opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue; afterwards I inserted the lancet into these boils and cut off a part of them, but only a little blood came out. And thus the passage of the woman's throat was opened up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I kept cutting away at this boil for a long time; it would always grow back again and fill in the space that I had cut open, becoming very large; finally I cauterized it inside her throat: thus it remained without growing any further; and I left these parts, and do not know what God did with her afterwards.
de l’uve	The eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the boil appears on the eyelid and it is swollen and elongated, it is called “perpendicular”; if it is below thick and round, it is called a “stye”. When it has been treated as we have said in the chapter on division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the hard boil has healed, and it is thin, then you must cut it off; and one that is round and assembled and not elongated. And it is blood red or dark colored or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger to the patient in this case. Therefore, when you see it, according to its size and length, you should have the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the lancet into the eyelid and draw it downwards and cut off one of the two instruments that I mentioned in the chapter on cutting kernels. And make sure not to cut more than the natural limit of the eyelid; for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech. And after the incision, use what we said earlier about the treatment of kernel boils, until it is healed. And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you should use cauterization with a thin hot iron. The manner of cauterization is as follows: Have the patient put their head in your hand and press their tongue with the instrument mentioned in the chapter on cautery or with tweezers; then heat it with very hot water so that it is not too thick nor too clear, and apply the pointed end of this instrument carefully to the boil, of which this is the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has at the top a small vessel where one puts the medication, like the horn of a spoon, and puts the instrument with all the medicine on the eyelid; and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth away from the medicine and the eyelid, so that it does not reach the throat and cause swelling. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eyelid for about half an hour until you see that it is darkened and the bites of the medicine are calmed; and if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above until the cotton touches the eyelid; do this often until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry and fall off after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to start the cauterization again with the medicine, then restart it, and afterwards wipe around the eyelid with cotton soaked in oil, and clean what is around the medicine; and rinse with cold water and gargle until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more gentle than cutting or cauterization. If it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calamint and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and chamomile and similar herbs, and mix them all together or some of them into one pot; put a little incense inside, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with earthenware, and there should be one small vessel like this inside the pot:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And whether it be of silver or bronze, and whether one of the heads is placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the boil through the tube, until the boil is killed; afterwards it should be begun again frequently, until the boil dries out, and ensure that this is not done at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things can happen there; and do not do this unless it is towards the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a tube and put an egg-shell at its end so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the egg-shell lets out vapor without scorching the mouth, and this is good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, a bone or fish spine, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue with the instrument so that you can see it move; and whatever is not visible and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps then the thing will come out through vomiting; or the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of flaxseed, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches its place, it will be visible, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take one instrument made of lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at its end so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have its end raised up high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest the whole thing go down, nor push the bone in too far; and it is better for the patient themselves to insert the instrument, for they will know where the thing has lodged itself; then draw it out gently along the entire length of the instrument until it comes out completely.
de la sansue de la gorge	de la sansue de la gorge
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	The blood is treated, as I have said in the division, with the cure of medicines; and when this does not help at all, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you about. And if you see the blood clot, then draw it out with a small hook or with fine forceps which are suitable for this purpose. And if these do not suffice, then take a heated awl and insert it into the throat of the patient, then insert one hot iron at the end of the awl, and do this often. And if the patient continues to spit water all day, then take a full cup of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without letting him swallow, and move your hand about; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without trouble. And the manner of fumigation is thus: take one pot which has live coals in it, and let the pot be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and let the hole of the tube be placed over the opening; then throw your fumigation onto the coals, and let the patient put the end of the tube into his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes all the way to the blood clot. And now the blood clot will fall, and if it does not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty foods and salted things, and drink no water at all. And then it will be necessary for it to come out by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the blood clot is this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs for entering into the throat; and it has the shape of a crow's beak, and has sharpness like a file, so that whatever it takes hold of, it cannot let go. And here you see its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, as remembered here from one and another in this book, and they are divided into two types: perforation and incision; and there are two ways of being similar to each other, the first is by its own appearance, and what it holds moisture. And the second way is for those places where they are on the body, because the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of a fleshy place are different from those that come in joints, and each one has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	"And so there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the bowels have fully died; and there are some such that must be pierced when they have grown hard, even if they do not die according to their course, like abscesses near joints. For when an abscess forms near a joint, and it is left alone until it becomes putrid all around, it may happen that the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb. But if the abscess is by the principal member, and you delay piercing it until it has fully died, it will harm the principal member; but if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it before it dies. And one must not pierce a hard abscess without completing digestion first, except for the one near the fundament, lest it burrow deep down and become extended inside, and a fistula forms that cannot heal in a short time."
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	"And you must know the hour for piercing an abscess that has died according to its course, and this is when the pain has ceased, and the division of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and from bursting and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the piercing lower down where the abscess depends more, and where it opens most; and let the piercing be long like the body of a finger, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints near nerves and arteries, and in all smooth places where there is no wrinkle."
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	"And in those that are wrinkled, according to the shape of that member. And when an abscess is in a hard place, it is better to leave piercing until digestion is complete, as we have said before. For if you pierce it beforehand, the body of the venom will be extended from it and will be full of much filth; and perhaps its lips and depth become hardened. And there are some abscesses that must be pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need. And you must make small holes in small abscesses, and large holes in large ones, with many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and there are such abscesses where one must press the heart and cover it when it has become as hard as a dried fig and is softened, then one must do as for boils. And there are some that are cut into three angles, and there are some whose covering is like the skin of a walnut, like abscesses in the armpits; and there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts."
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Those that have no head, like soft superficial abscesses, must be pierced plainly. And when the abscess is large and has swollen greatly, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once, but draw out a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again; do this many times gradually, until all the pus comes out, especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or pregnant woman, or small child, or old man decrepit. For the spirit may sometimes jump with the issue of the pus, and perhaps the patient dies, and you are not aware of it. Therefore beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, examine the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, then prepare lint bands or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess and there are many holes, then it is necessary to put in each one a bandage so that they come together; and if you have cut off a part of the skin in the abscess and have sewed it around, then it is necessary to fill it with dry cotton or linen cloth shavings without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if bleeding occurs in your operation, then prepare cold water and a vessel, and moisten one cloth, and put it on the place where the bleeding is occurring many times. And if the bleeding continues, then bring treatment and care, and the powders that I have said for the hands in this book, and if it is in wintertime, and the place where the abscess is very nervous, then it is necessary to put on wet lint bands and cloths in hot wine and oil; and if it is in summer time, and the place is fleshy, then it is necessary to put on wet lint bands and cloths in cold water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said before; then untie the abscess and wipe it clean and cure it, as it should be, until it is healed."
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	"And this one must know universally in the cure of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed with the cure of abscesses, and here is that chapter."
des soros	Here are some translations of the word "soros" from Middle French to English:
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	**Line-by-line translation:**
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And cutting into an abscess that is hard and moist, it is easier, for they have little blood in them. And there are some of these abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, and of those abscesses I once saw one on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not be broken; and if one had cut into it, one would have made as good a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, except for those which come to the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made at the lowest place possible, so that the bowels may exit; and they are treated as is necessary.
des scrophules	scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and below the buttocks, and also in the angles, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and they are many, and they are interconnected with each other. And each scrofula is properly inside its own skin, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not want to obey treatment. Therefore, in one that you see well disposed for touching, and is similar in color to the skin, and moves from each part and is not hard against the nerves of the neck nor against the artery nor the duct, and is not deep; then it must be cut through on top, and scraped from each side, and the two lips of the heart are opened at the angles if you have need, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and drain it little by little, and make sure that you do not cut into the nerve nor the vein, and do not use a spatula or cutting instrument, so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too deep, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound powdered vitriol, or some powders that stop bleeding, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound begins to soften and start to decay. And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work until you finish it. Then search with your index finger if there remain any small scrofulas, and cut them out and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not necessary that you cut into that scrofula at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself without harm; then dress the wound with soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, because there is no remaining excess for the size of the scrofula. Then it is necessary that you cut into the root of it, and draw out pus, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulas that contain excess matter, pierce where it appears more open; and pierce in this way as the one mentioned earlier, depending on it, then bring it tents with ointment and similar things, so that it rots what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then dress it with ointment between the flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	de squinance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the operation of cutting a throat, but I never saw it done in our land, and that is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have quinsy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" be cleared; and one does not receive help through this, for all the veins and the vessels of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two glands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the vessels, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid suffocation which comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we do so below three circles or four, a small cut across between two circles or by the amount of the cut in the soft palate, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and this area is so connected to the epiglottis that there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat all around the onyx, then cut the heart until it reaches the chin; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the soft palate as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the pharynx that jumps forward through the area that has been broken, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a little.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour of doubt about strangulation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart and sew it up entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked off, and the patient is judged to be near death, and his breathing has failed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus death is prevented.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And therefore the ancients commanded that the wound be left open until the worst of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded that the wound be sewn up and cured until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took one knife and stabbed it into her throat and cut part of the arteries of the lung.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found that the blood issuing from it was not from the veins or arteries but only from the throat, and the breath was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed up the wound and treated her until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	"And it happened to the maiden that she was hoarse of voice, and afterward returned to her former state."
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	"Therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear."
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	"This type of swelling is called 'throat hernia' and appears as a large, dark purple swelling, occurring most commonly in women;"
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	"And it occurs in two ways: naturally, or due to accident; or else by nature there is no cause."
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	"And accidents occur in two ways: one resembles fatty tissue, and the other resembles swelling that comes from an artery;"
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	"and there should be fear, especially in the case of small ones, where it is necessary to operate carefully and examine the entire cavity;"
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	"If you find it like a fat nut and not attached to any vessel, cut it like a fatty tumor, and remove it completely if possible;"
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	"And search everywhere carefully, and treat it as necessary until it is completely healed."
des nous	of fatty tumors
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	"There are many kinds of tumors, all of which I will describe in detail;"
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	"And now it is necessary that I explain the difference between a fatty tumor and an abscess."
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	"I say that an abscess is hot and feverish until the suppuration has passed, at which point it becomes filled with pus, and then the fever and heat subside."
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	"With a fatty tumor, there is no heat, fever or pain, and it contains sebaceous matter within its own sac, appearing in the same color as the skin, beginning like a pimple and becoming larger;"
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	"And there are two kinds of fatty tumors: fatty or moist, with many appearing in the colors mentioned earlier."
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	"When treating a fatty tumor, it is necessary to first examine and express the contents using an instrument called the 'intromittor', according to the shape described in the following chapter."
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	"The method of examining an abscess in a fatty tumor is to press gently on the most moist area you find and twist your hands slowly until you feel that the instrument has pierced the skin, then proceed according to the size of the abscess;"
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	"then remove the intromittor carefully, taking care not to let anything spring out."
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	"If moist corrupt matter flows out, whatever its color may be, incise it as described for other abscesses;"
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	"But if no moist matter comes out after using the intromittor, know that it is fatty, and then incise it in a cross shape, grasp it with forceps, lightly scrape off the skin on each side, and remove the fatty tumor along with its capsule without tearing it."
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	"And if you cannot remove it intact, then take it out in pieces until nothing remains."
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	"For if anything is left behind, the fatty tumor will grow back many times;"
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	"and if a little bit remains and the skin becomes inflamed, sprinkle some aqueous corrosive powders on it, apply pressure to the wound, apply a soothing poultice for hot abscesses, and treat it with other remedies until it heals completely."
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	"And if the fatty tumor is large, cut around its edges like two lips of the wound, and treat it as one would a wound that enters flesh."
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	"And if a vein is beating nearby or another complication arises, quickly apply powdered vitriol to the area, leaving it on for two or three days until the wound becomes suppurated and the inflammation of the blood subsides, then return to remove any remaining fatty tumor."
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	"Here are the shapes of intromittors: there are three sizes - large, medium, and small. There are also four square ones called 'albarets' and one round one called a 'breb'. There are also three sizes for encircling fistulous abscesses;"
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	"and they are like needles used for cauterization, made of brass, iron, or silver. The yellow ones are the most valuable, and blackened ones are more suitable for encircling fistulous openings;"
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	"and they come in three sizes - large, medium, and small - according to the size of the opening."
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	"The shapes of forceps are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small. There are also forceps with two openings, available in three sizes;"
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	"And there are forceps with three openings, also available in three sizes. There are also forceps with two openings and those with a single opening, both available in three sizes. All of these are necessary for their respective uses."
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	"The tips of these instruments used for cutting are sharp. There are also some that only cut on one side, which are used to scrape fatty tumors so as not to injure veins or nerves;"
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	"And among these intromittors are the tweezers that can be placed in one's hand so that the patient does not notice them during the opening of abscesses;"
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	"and they come in three sizes - large, small, and medium - as you can see;"
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	"but they are only used for fine work, such as legs, arms, breasts, angles, and similar locations;"
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	"and sometimes another small instrument resembling a fistula probe is made in this shape, used to staunch bleeding:"
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	"And it is sometimes placed at the location where veins and arteries are severed or where there has been excessive bleeding. Sometimes they are made in this larger size:"
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	"Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to decay, making them resemble women's breasts;"
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	"and remain unsightly and swollen, and anyone who wishes to treat them must follow the shape of this line B up to G;"
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	"then scrape away the fat, apply a medication for wounds that penetrate flesh, then bring together the two edges of the wound to suture it closed, and treat it until it heals."
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	"And if the breast hangs down and is soft due to its size, like those of women, then make two incisions above it, resembling two slits;"
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	"So that one incision is connected to the other at their ends, with the larger line containing the smaller according to this shape, from line B to line G;"
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"then scrape away the skin between the two edges and remove the fat. Then proceed with suturing and applying powders as mentioned earlier, along with any other necessary treatments until it heals."
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	"And if it does not heal, or if the incision was not complete because the patient would not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment;"
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	"And leave it until it consumes the remaining skin and fat, then treat it until it heals."
des apostemes des asselles	"Abscesses of the armpits"
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	"The abscesses that occur under the arms are usually hard tumors resembling scrofula or have rough surfaces, and some contain moisture."
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the boil has been drained out, then fill the wound with soft cotton, and leave it until the next day. Then remove all the cotton and dress it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the boil resembles scrofula, then cut it as we have said for scrofula wounds, and if the wound fills with pus again, then apply a cauterization as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is closed, many boils often form, and the same occurs with a swollen vein and boil;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes it thus when it is for the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, then there is one sensation of pressure; and when it is for the vein, then there appears red swelling
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the buttocks and hips and neck and in many other places, where it is very large
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, surgery with an iron should be avoided, and the one at the head must also be avoided, and in the case of swelling from an artery, cut through the skin above the length
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the incision like a mouth, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then place a needle underneath it and pierce it until the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as I have shown you regarding the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then pierce the place between the two ties with an intromittent until the pus comes out there, and let the abscess be opened
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then dress the wound so that it drains freely until the tie falls off
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treat it with ointment appropriate for this wound until it is healed
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	And if the abscess is on the vein's course, then you must stretch your hand from what you can reach of the abscess to all the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then place the needle underneath the spot you are holding with your hand, and pierce it so that there is one doubled thread, which you then draw from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then sew up the boil as I told you to, or tie it with one of two threads from either side.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	If you doubt that the thread has gone too far, then insert another needle with one thread under all of the boil at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut off the boil until all the excess comes out, then cut away the excess from around the heart and leave what is tied.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a cloth moistened in wine and oil upon it, and thereafter apply dressings and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of boils on the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, just as boils come to the artery and vein, so too do boils appear on the nerves when they are injured or from excessive exertion, etc.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And these appear most often on the joints and toes and in all places where there are articulations; they are painful boils, their color resembles that of the skin, and they have many different aspects without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is squeezed firmly, the sick person feels pain, but it is not deep in the flesh, rather under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	"and moves well on all sides,
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And he who is at the head or forehead makes the skin like a sieve.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the boil is small, take some tweezers and grasp it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, suspend it with a needle and lance it, then remove it and sew up the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of hanging warts
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere, and is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to them, and the roots are thin and the heads are large; there are some small ones and very large ones;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw one man who had two in his belly that were more similar to mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them; they were white, had fine roots, were already split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found that one weighed 18 ounces, and the other weighed 6 ounces. The appearance of the incision indicates whether the patient is moist; the color of the flesh is white and moist with fine roots.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	"If you cut into the shoulder blade widely, and if the fire cautery is present at that time, then be prepared for many excessive flows of blood during the incision. If bleeding overcomes you, then promptly proceed to cauterize."
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	"And if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, then take one well-made linen thread, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;"
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	"And then tighten it again and continue to pull the linen thread until it cuts through the artery without causing injury. And if the roots are large, be afraid to cut them even for the abdomen, but you can safely cut half of it,"
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	"Then cauterize it so that it does not return. Then dress the wound and make sure you do not cut the thele (udder) which is of dark color, poor sense, and produces milk."
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	"For this is an incurable tumor, and I will discuss the treatment for cancer later on."
quant li boude ist fuer	"When the wound has healed"
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the swelling appears due to cauterization of a wound or rupture of a sinew, and it is on the belly and affects some of the bowels as happens in other lacerations, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what comes before, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is due to the rupture of the sinew and the bursting of the bowel, then the color of the swelling appears like the color of the body, and there is little pain or opening from various places.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the bursting of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse; and when it is pressed with two fingers it sinks in and then returns, and sometimes it is hard, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the anus during difficult labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is light and opens well when pressed by hand, not constricting at all; but if it is due to blood, then the swelling appears large and hard with these signs, and is fixed in place according to its quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and its appearance shows whether it is due to arterial or venous blood, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter on swellings, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then you must order the patient to extend their arm straight out and grasp the swelling all around with your hand;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then have them lie down on their back between your hands.
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the area that you have marked with your fingers to all sides of it,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then they cut off half of the abscess from above with one stroke.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then they tie it tightly around with strong thread or silk string and make sure the bone is healed;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open the half of the abscess that has spread over the bandage, insert your index finger into it, and search for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it wrapped around the bone, untie it and put the intestine back inside the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, take it with tweezers and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein is against you, carefully go around it, then return to your work and take two needles and thread them with two strong threads, and sew around what you have done in a cross stitch pattern.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then squeeze the abscess at four places above the needles and if necessary remove them, leaving it alone until it can rot away on its own; cut off any dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Or you may cut it when it becomes soft and rotting, then cleanse the wound as necessary and dress it according to what we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And remove any blood or moisture that you find, then cleanse the wound and sew it up.
dou chancre	Of a chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the section on the signs of a chancre and how one should treat it with medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment. Now we will discuss a chancre that is spreading to the marrow and requires great caution in its treatment. The ancients said that when a chancre appears where it can be scraped off like those found on the breast or hip, then all of it must be removed at the beginning; but if it is large and old, one should not approach it because I have never seen anyone heal from one, nor have I heard of any such case before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operation is performed where it can be removed, as we have said, it is done thus: first purge the patient with black colic; then make them vomit if they show signs of repletion, and prepare the patient a good place to perform the operation. Then grasp the chancre with tweezers and cut it all around and remove it completely without leaving anything behind. Let the blood flow freely and squeeze the wound with your hand or some other object until bleeding stops. If bleeding from the incision of an artery or vein hinders you, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already spoken in the section on the signs of dropsy and how water is collected in it, and the signs of each kind and their treatment by medicines and surgery. Only in one kind called "eclites" should surgery be considered. One must not perform surgery on these two kinds: tympanites and yposarche, as they are deadly conditions. Therefore, if you treat dropsy called "eclites" with medicine and it does not improve, examine whether the patient is weak or has another disease such as tympanites or diarrhea. If the patient is strong and healthy and has no other diseases besides dropsy, and is not too young or too old, then one should perform surgery in this way:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lift the patient up onto your hands, and have an assistant press the abdomen from below using the lower part of the foot. Then take a spinal needle shaped like this: it should be sharp at both ends but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor so blunt that it cannot cut.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then check if the dropsy has spread towards the intestines: you should cut through the flesh about three fingers' width below the navel. If the dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the navel; if it's due to bile, make it on the right side. Make sure the patient does not lie on the incision so that the superfluous fluid does not drain into a weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the skin with the needle and insert it, lifting your hand so that the needle goes between the skin and the fascia about the width of a nail or around four fingers' width. Pierce the fascia until you reach the empty space where the water is located. Then insert this instrument shaped like a silver tube: it should be made of bronze or lightweight brass with a small hole at one end and three holes on one side and two on the other. The edges should be cut like a feather, as shown in the illustration of how writers shape their quills.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top of this instrument is the alembic (a container with a long neck). When the instrument reaches the water, tilt it downwards to collect about half or a third of the fluid. Do not remove too much at once as this could cause the patient to die from loss of spirit, faintness, or approaching death due to excessive bleeding.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But remove the fluid according to the patient's strength and their pulse rate. Then withdraw the instrument and retain the fluid using your hand over the hole in the fascia that you pierced earlier. Resume draining on the following day if the patient tolerates it well, removing only a small amount of fluid each time.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Continue this process for a few days until only a little water remains. If you are unsure about the patient's condition and leave too much fluid, treat them with warm baths, poultices or sun exposure, and give them dry medicines to drink. Also cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after draining the fluid, as I have described previously.
de l’estopement de la verge	The section on impotence is titled "De l'estopement de la verge" which means "On the stoppage of the penis". This refers to erectile dysfunction or impotence. The text discusses the causes and treatments for this condition.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Sometimes children are born without a urethral opening or with a small one, or it may not be in its proper position. In such cases, it is necessary to pierce the penis with a very fine needle shaped like this: then insert a thin silver catheter and tie it off, leaving it in place for three or four days. When the child needs to urinate, remove the catheter and allow them to do so. Then replace the catheter. Sometimes no catheter may be needed as urine will still flow around the closed opening.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose urethral opening is small will benefit from treatment with a silver catheter as described above, which will help to widen the opening. Those born without a urethral opening at its proper location are disabled and cannot urinate properly until they learn to lift their penis upwards. They also have difficulty impregnating women because semen cannot reach the mouth of the womb (cervix). This is considered a serious condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The technique for performing a circumcision is as follows: have the patient lie on their back. Then grasp the glans of the penis and cut it around like the tip of a feather quill so that the urethral opening remains in its proper position. Be careful not to cause bleeding, which can occur frequently during this procedure. If bleeding does occur, use something that stops bleeding and treat any resulting wound until it has healed.
des pustules de la verge	Of the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often these blisters appear on the penis, and there is an ugly appearance of skin; and some are malignant and others benign. Therefore you must take them with tweezers, squeeze them out and clean all of them thoroughly, then put wet cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then apply the ointment diaphoretic until it is gone.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blister is malignant, of foul color and stinking, then you must cauterize it. When you have squeezed it out, and if the blister is at the tip of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the inner part first; and when that is healed, then cure the outer part. For when you cure them together, it is not certain that the glans of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption comes into its flesh and into the coition. Therefore you must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then bind on the wound with honey and flour paste made from the bark of pomegranate fruits and figs; then cure it with other dressings until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this method: The cautery has two uses together: for bleeding and corruption. And if the glans of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a lead pipe into the urethra and have the sick person urinate through it; and when the skin at the tip of the penis that needs to be circumcised is exposed, or it is exposed due to an injury or aposteme, then you must burn it with a sharp instrument until the foreskin is separated and the glans of the penis is delivered from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is difficult to separate these parts, then you must burn them with one spatula at the tip of the penis and foreskin; then carefully dissect between two and insert a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it may not adhere again.
de la circoncision	Et se c’est un garcon qui doit estre circoncis, si covient que tu coupes le pelz a .vi. mois, et les autres enfans a .xii. mois; et il est bon quant tu les feras circonsire quant l’enfant aura .iii. ans ou environ.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in its continuity; nevertheless, when we perform this operation willingly and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work with the least harm possible.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children because it was not part of their law, and we only have knowledge of it through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who perform circumcision around one dal, and by force, and for an entire novacule; so it was that the heart would flee because there are two tissues, and sometimes one cuts the upper one and leaves the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Otherwise they cover it up and the pain is doubled, and at the time of cleansing the point of the member is not secure; and sometimes during cleansing of the foreskin the knife slips and ruins the operation, and many times it happens that they do not need cleansing, which I have seen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Regarding the cleansing done by force, I have found that using a thread tied around the entire length is the best experiment because the force cuts equally well both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	"For when you press your hand thus, cut evenly in one continuous stroke; but ensure the thread is tightly wrapped around the skin. And the manner of the first operation should be such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are only tying the thread around the staff and then allow it to enjoy all possible ways."
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	"Then hold the staff upright between your hands and hide the force between your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments. Then place your hand on the staff and blow gently, then pull upwards until the skin of the staff is entered. Then clean it well from the filth that has gathered there, then tie the opening with a double thread, then tie it below one knot to another. Hold it with two fingers at the second knot near the little finger and cut between the two knots, then quickly lift the heart upwards and pull out the tip of the staff."
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Then allow the blood to flow freely until it stops, for this is the mother's part; then sprinkle powder on top of the powder and place a piece of gauze soaked in a mixture of raw egg yolk tempered with rosewater, boiled and cooled, mixed with good fresh rose oil. Leave it overnight and continue the treatment until it heals."
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	"The form of the instruments for cleansing should be as follows: the two tips should be thin and sharp, and the tips should also be as large as a hazelnut, equal in size:"
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	"The error of cleansing occurs when the heart is inside the incision, therefore it is necessary to extend it with your fingernail before the wound becomes inflamed; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use forceps, and then cut it."
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	"And if it lasts for three days and the part below the staff is swollen, let it be until the inflammation has subsided, then gently scrape off the scab; cut as much as you can move without harming the part of the staff, for it will not harm it."
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Therefore treat the wound with quick-acting powder, as we have said when treating powders, and if you cut too much from the heart and it goes upwards, it will not harm. Treat it therefore as we have said until it heals."
dou retenement de l’urine	"On the retention of urine"
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	"The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or flesh, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division:"
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	"And if the urine is not flowing and you see that retention is due to a stone lodged in or near the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on their knees; place their feet on their back and extend their belly towards the back, and have the patient push down as hard as they can; thus the neck of the bladder will be forced open above for the expulsion of the stone, so that the urine is released."
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	"And if it does not come out as we have said and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instruments called a 'syringe', of which this is the form: made of thin silver, like the feather of a bird; it should be one and a half palms long and thin at the tip."
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	"And the method of issuing urine is as follows: take one doubled thread and tie a small bag of wool or cotton at its end, then insert the end of the thread into the syringe. Cut off any excess wool and push it all the way to the tip of the syringe. Then grease the syringe with oil or butter and dove's dung. Have the patient sit on a chair, raise their bladder and penis with moistened oil and olive oil water."
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	"Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis. Then fold the penis upwards towards the belly and push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder. The patient will feel when it is empty. If this is not done correctly, it may be because the tube through which it passes is twisted. Then pull out the thread with the wool bag attached, and the urine follows the wool. Finally, remove the syringe and allow the urine to flow."
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	"And continue using the syringe until the bladder is emptied, then relieve the patient."
des maladies de la vessie	"On the diseases of the bladder"
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	"When there is erosion or blood in the bladder, or putrefaction has accumulated there, and you see that watery and medicinal substances are being discharged, then use all the instruments called a 'clepsydra', of which this is the form:"
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	"It is closed and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The high parts are made such that medicinal substances will fit tightly without additional pressure being applied to close the penis, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted as needed."
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	"And when you see that your medicinal substances are being discharged into the bladder, insert the tip of the catheter into the moisture and draw out what is inside. Then replace the catheter firmly; thus the moisture will enter and reach the bladder, so that the patient feels it."
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	"And this is the form of the fine enema used to administer an enema to the bladder:"
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	"And it is made of silver or brass, with the tip higher and one loop below where it falls. Then take a bladder from a sheep and fill it with the moisture you wish to use for the enema. Tie it between the two loops with a doubled thread. Heat some of this moisture over the fire. Then insert the tip of the enema into the penis and press your hand on the bladder until you feel that the moisture has reached the bladder."
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	"And if you do not have the bladder of a sheep, take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it. Pierce it roundly all around, then pass a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle like a sieve, and put inside what you wish to use for oil, moisture, and water. Tie it with the instrument and proceed as you would with the bladder."
de la piere	"on stones"
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	"I have already discussed in the section on stones their different types and methods of extraction along with medicinal remedies. I also explained the difference between stones that enter through the rains and all the signs associated with them, as well as which stones require surgical intervention - both in the bladder and in the penis. I will now explain this briefly and clearly."
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	"I say that stones which enter the bladder occur most frequently in children. This is a sign that urine is being expelled from the bladder like water in its fineness. The child will strain and grind his penis and frequently urinate until it becomes painful. In many cases, this condition is accompanied by inflammation. Children under the age of four usually have an easy recovery, while older adults find it much more difficult. Those who are middle-aged fare moderately well. The cure is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones."
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster to draw out all the foul matter that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and lay them downwards and move them towards the bottom so that the stone descends into the depths of the bladder, which sometimes rises to the high place; then have him sit between your hands prepared in this way, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward; then search for it and touch it inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the flank, then immediately cut on the stone. And if it does not fall out completely when touched, moisten your middle finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a child, or your index finger if the patient is a youth; place it in its base and search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, grasp it at the neck of the bladder; then press on it with your finger and push it out where you saw cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that with his right hand he stretch the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the scrotum in the part where the incision is made; then insert the spatula like this, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make the incision between what is between the scrotum and the fundament, not in the middle but on the left side of the groin; and let it be straight over the stone, and your two fingers should always be on the fundament, and let the cut be wide on this side, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Perhaps the pressure of your two fingers on the fundament will cause it to slip out without effort; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: these are difficult to remove; but there are also those that are smooth, round like a pebble, from which extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Therefore, for those stones that have angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not slip out, then you must extract it with forceps that are like a chisel at the end, in order to grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or place underneath one of these subtle curved instruments at the end; and if you cannot catch it this way, widen the hole by a little, and if the skin tears, apply vitriol
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then extract it and then remove the smaller ones if there are several. And if they are very large, then they must be removed and a larger incision made. For two things can happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out continuously from where the wound cannot be closed; but nevertheless, make every effort to extract it, or crush it with forceps until you remove it in pieces
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And once you have completed your task, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, then compress it and place over it a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot inflammation; then wrap the patient in blankets up to his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the bandage, wash the wound area very well with oil and water, then apply ointment of diacereion and ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot inflammation comes to the wound and corrosion, and congealed blood appears in the bladder, and urine retention occurs, which is recognized by the fact that it does not flow out with urine: then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if any remains, it will harm the bladder and cause its corruption
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then wash the wound with water and rosewater and salt, and help him in every way that you know until he is healed; and it is necessary that each time you treat him, you tie his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the wound area
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra and stuck there, preventing urine from flowing out; treat it as I said earlier, that you cut it many times, or excuse yourself from cutting by this treatment. I have already tested this method successfully
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron needle according to this shape and with three points stuck into a splinter of wood
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take one thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the needle gently into the urethra until it reaches the stone; then turn the needle slowly in the stone little by little until you can pierce the stone on the other side; then urine will soon come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the urethra. It will soon be crushed and come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the urethra at the location of the stone between the two threads, then extract it with forceps, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it heals
de la piere des femmes	de la piere des femmes
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone enters into women's urethra, and if it does happen sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: firstly, because by chance the woman may be a virgin; secondly, because one cannot find a woman who is well-informed and willing to uncover herself before physicians
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third reason is that by chance one cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that a woman's stone is deeper than a man's stone, which means that a deeper incision must be made, and there is great fear involved
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you are compelled to do this, then you must take a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, then search for a chaste virgin who knows something about this matter; and present her with a clean sheet suitable for examining women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to perform what you command regarding the examination of the stone
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And examine very carefully whether the woman is a virgin: if she is, then you must insert your finger into her fundament and search for the stone; and if you find it, constrain it with your finger from below, and command her to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and feel and press her left hand firmly on the bladder
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh; then make an incision on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the vagina, where it is usually located, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make the first incision small
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then insert the forceps into the incision, if you feel the stone so close to the wound that it can come out with forceps; and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots. Know their appearances in order to determine the outcome
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the urine flows abundantly, then put powdered vitriol in place and hold it for an hour until the urine is stanched; then return to your task until the stone is extracted, and have the instruments that I told you about regarding the extraction of stones from men ready to assist you
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood begins to flow, and this is from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the spot and hold it with bandages and bindings, and do not recommence cutting again, and leave the stone alone and do not remove it, lest by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has been stopped, and the place is ready, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	of carnal hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquatic hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white seed, which is under the skin of the thighs containing the egg; and it is called "seed," and sometimes properly in the fabric of the egg, so that one might think there is another egg; and this happens if not punctured.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia comes from weakness that affects the thighs, and this matter becomes spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the thighs, and this moisture has many colors: either declining towards yellowness, or without redness, or black, or aquatic white, and these things happen more often
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this gathering: for if it is in the white seed that we have spoken of, then the swelling is round, about the size of an egg's shape, and does not open the skin because it has moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in its own fabric, then the swelling is round with part of the egg, and for this reason one might think that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	"Now if moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white fat, it is clearly felt; therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, try the entire introite square, which has the form given above."
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	"Therefore, according to what comes after the introite, judge what is inside."
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	"And when we cauterize it with iron, then the patient must be made healthy according to their strength and the fullness of their body; then lay them on their back, on something slightly raised, and place many cloths beneath them;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on the right side, extending the wand towards one of the two ribs on the left side of the heart.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the left spatula and cut through the skin of the thighs from the lengthwise until near the knee, and make your incision straight down through the skin to expose the white fascia. Then carefully peel it back according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the water-filled sac with one large opening and remove all the water. Then place your bandages, elevating the water-filled sac upwards. Do not touch the heart of the lungs, but only the water-filled sac itself. Cut away everything, or cut in pieces if necessary, from its sides subtly, so that if you do not cut it finely enough, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg jumps outside of your work, then return it to its place once you have completed the operation on the water-filled sac. Then join the two leaves of the heart of the lungs with a suture, and then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, then tie up the vessels that are suspended there, stopping the flow of blood. Then cut open the lung at all the suspensory ligaments and remove the egg, treating it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are the roots of the lungs. Cut open the other part as you did with the first one equally, then suck out the blood and place moistened wool in rose oil on the wound
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	Then place another piece of wool moistened in wine and oil on top of the two lungs, and cover them with doubled cloths. Then tie it all together according to this pattern:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of cloth and fill them with wool waste according to this pattern. Sew them together at the collar of the breeches, and one piece should be placed on the buttocks up to the back, while the other covers the front of the elbow. Then tie both ends over the two angles of the lungs, and all the ties should come together in a loop around the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this root is treated with a cautery instead of an iron cut, and thus you should take one scalpel-shaped cautery, cut through the skin of the lungs, and heat it as we have said so that the white sac containing water is exposed
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take the cautery in this manner and prick the white sac once with it, then burn it with this sharp cautery that is hot:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	"And cut in all ways that you can, until you scrape it all clean; and make sure the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more sound; and move cautiously to avoid blood loss, and soften the edges of your incisions."
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	"And if anything goes against you, such as a wound that is hot or blood loss or any other issue, then treat what is going against you, according to what has been said before."
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	"And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this procedure due to its harshness, then prepare for perforation, as I shall tell you, and it is necessary that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that watery humor is present there."
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	"So make the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the boil in the part below it with a wide-bladed scalpel, and insert the perforator along the length of the body; and let the opening be large enough for all the fluid to flow out."
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	"Then place cotton on the wound and tie it down, and leave it there for the remaining fluid to flow out, then treat it until the wound is healed."
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	"And if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to flow out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a pen or the instrument used to treat watery humors, the shape of which is shown above; and widen the wound by one finger's breadth, and know that the fluid will return and gather again after five or six months, and when it has gathered as before, then the patient will pass his days."
de l’aposteme des coions	"On boils on buttocks"
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	"Know that in the section of this root there are many dispositions, for which reason it seems to me that it would be better to leave it alone."
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	"And I will tell you about the procedure and the symptoms of a boil."
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	"I say therefore that many boils come on the body, especially on the buttocks; and this happens often."
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	"This is to say that it is due to acid and watery humor that has spread to the buttocks, or from an injury;"
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	"and the color of the boil is according to the color of the skin; and it does not cause pain, yet it is a severe boil;"
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	"and sometimes there are painful and hard boils with a purplish color, and occasionally one comes from an artery or congestion of veins."
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	"When it is due to an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the boil when you press it with your fingers;"
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	"And it is not necessary that you touch it."
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	"That which is caused by congestion of veins is known by its disposition when touched with the fingers,"
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	"and can be treated in this manner and also on other parts."
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	"And it is that you cut the root of the buttocks, then raise the boil at the top and treat it with warm water and clean cloths, and relieve the suspension from all around the boil."
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	"If the boil is already solid with these nearby parts, then it is necessary that you treat the boil and cut it open;"
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	"And if it is hard to the touch or within the vessels, then it is necessary that you relieve all the tension and cut it completely around."
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	"And if the birthmark of the skin is in the hinder part, then it is necessary that you cut off all of it and remove the boil as we have said."
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And when your procedure is completed, then fill the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed."
de l’aposteme des coions	"On boil on buttocks"
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess covered by a covering resembling a strawberry, with softening of the joints
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient cries out in pain when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	"And the treatment of this illness is almost as fearful as what came before."
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	"However, we will tell you the operation for it according to what the ancients did."
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	"You must have the patient sit on one raised chair and then place a sling below their arms at your thighs,"
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	"And take hold of the master's hand, extend it strongly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	"Then cut sharply and widely across the tendons on the outer side of the wrist until they are exposed,"
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	"And then scrape away from each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;"
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	"Then I will insert a needle with a doubled thread and tie it at the first place where the nerve appeared, and then tie it again at the other end;"
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	"Then cut through it evenly along the length of the body, and remove the corrupted tissues;"
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	"And then dress the wound as is done for other operations where sinews are cut, so that no blood vessels nourish either of the tendons;"
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	"For otherwise there will be no harm, and if the nerve comes from all the vessels, then it is necessary to tie the tendons to all the vessels;"
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	"So that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot heal."
de la routure dou syfac	"Treatment for a broken nose:"
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	"The outcome of this condition depends on whether the fracture reaches the nasal septum or extends onto the frontal bone in the angle region. If it does not reach the nasal septum, then the intestines descend from that side of the nose;"
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	"And this fracture occurs either in the nasal bone itself or due to an extension of it, and these two types arise from many causes such as blows, falls, jumps, carrying heavy weights, and similar incidents;"
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	"The signs that it is an extension of the nasal bone fracture are that it occurs gradually over a long period and does not happen suddenly;"
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	"And there is swelling all around towards the back, because the nasal bone presses on the intestines."
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	"And the signs that it is a fracture of the nasal bone itself are that there is sudden pain at the onset, and there is diverse swelling apparent under the skin, due to the escape of intestinal contents through the defect in the nasal bone."
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	"And sometimes the intestines may descend with the fracture and become trapped in it, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed upon."
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	"And these fractures of the nasal bone require careful handling so that they do not happen frequently due to poor treatment."
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	"The method of treatment is as follows: you should instruct the patient to gently replace any prolapsed intestines back into the wound using their hand if possible;"
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	"Then elevate his head between your hands and raise his thighs;"
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	"Then elevate the heart above (the level of) the wound and cut away all the skin from the tendons along their length;"
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	"Then insert bone forceps into the wound near the nasal bone using however many you need to expose the fracture and allow the bone to protrude;"
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	"Then strip away the periosteum covering the nasal bone until it is exposed on all sides;"
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	"Then insert your index finger into the opening at the base of the tendon, between the two nasal bones and behind the upper lip;"
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	"And separate the tissue behind the upper lip and between the two nasal bones. Then use your right hand to elevate the tendon from inside the wound while using your left hand to expose the nasal bone and lift up the upper lip together with the nasal bone towards the neck;"
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	"And instruct your assistant to elevate the upper lip while releasing any tension behind it;"
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	"Then check with both hands whether there is any prolapsed intestine wrapped around the nasal bone. If you find any, push it back into the abdominal cavity;"
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	"Then take a needle with a thread made of 10 strands and insert it into the posterior aspect of the nasal bone behind the tendon. Then cut off the excess thread leaving about 4 inches;"
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	"Then tie the threads together in a cross-over fashion and secure the nasal bone (which is underneath the tendon) with a strong knot tied twice;"
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	"Then wrap the threads around the nasal bone and tie them securely with two knots to prevent any vessels that supply it from entering the wound and causing swelling;"
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	"Then place the second knot in line with the first knot about two fingers' width away from it. After tying these knots, leave enough length of nasal bone underneath the tendon to protrude a finger's width;"
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	"And then trim the excess nasal bone flush with the curvature of the upper lip. Then cut away any remaining skin and muscle from underneath the tendon as described earlier;"
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	"Then apply moistened lint soaked in oil to the wound and secure it with the knot we have described."
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	"And sometimes it may be necessary to cauterize the exposed nasal bone after the incision has been made in case of any bleeding."
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	"For this happens very often and leaves the knot hanging loose. If it takes too long to fall off, it should be removed with warm water and the dressing reapplied until it does fall off;"
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	"Then treat the wound using other methods until it heals perfectly."
de hernie carnouse	Here is the translation of the given text with a focus on the term "hernie carnosous":
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this art I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done in such a way as one sees the art together, so that you bind the vessels, after cutting it lightly above or below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut off the head of the shoulder, and cure the wound that caused it until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the angles, as we have said, and the place is opened; and none of the intestines come out of their places, except for a little bit, which should be repaired immediately.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	And if it remains too long at this point, the wound swells or becomes infected until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens due to the expansion of the infection that is at the angles, as we have said, because it is expanded, then the place becomes softened and swollen and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the cure for this is by cauterization, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	And that the sick person lies on their back between your hands, then cut off the swollen place of the rupture from its width according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	And then remove the infection that is under the skin where it entered, then take a hot iron and place it on the visible place of the infection;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press it to the depth of the belly, then cut the two visible places of the infection on top of the iron, and cut both of them.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the top of the iron, and do not cut into the infection or extend it with any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal prolapse.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then heal it according to the treatment for wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The infection is confined, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization should be performed more gently at this place, and closer to saving the patient's life.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Regarding the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the thighs becomes softened in some men because the flesh that is inside is softened, and it is unpleasant to see. And it is necessary, when one wants to heal it, for the sick person to lie on their back, and cut off the softened skin from the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you wish, first sew up the excess of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the sutures, and heal it as one would other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Regarding castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Know that castrations are forbidden in our law, and I would like not to speak of it in this book. And there is no need to mention it except for two reasons: the first is that the surgeon should know how to respond when asked about it and its treatment; the second is because we often have a need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and other animals. I say therefore that castrations are performed in two ways: either by traction or by cutting. In the one that we perform by traction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging, then grasp them with your hand until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them. For castration by cutting: it is necessary to tie the animal, press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensiony ligament, and cut each testicle with one cut after having well scraped them; leave a little piece of skin around the wound and remove the delicate tissue that is on the vessels; this manner of castration is gentle compared to that done by traction because sometimes some things remain at the traction which causes the animal to desire lust, then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Regarding hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles opens also like the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes urine comes out from there. And the other way among women is to have on the pubic area both a penis and two testicles. The treatment for the man and the woman is to cut away all the attached skin and treat it as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tenting is an attachment on the natural part that is too ugly to look at; some women have it as large as a hand, and that is its treatment. You must cut away the superfluous growth of the tenting with your hand or scissors, cutting it lightly; do not go too deep, lest blood flow, then treat it like any other wound until it is healed; and there is another growth that appears at the mouth of the womb, and the anus, sometimes urine flows out, and resembles the likeness of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it «cow disease». You must cut it away, as we have said with tenting, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	Erratique
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratique is when the nature of woman is not pierced or the opening is small; it is either natural at birth or accidental due to illness that has occurred there; or it is from attached skin, or thin and subtle mucous membrane or thick, and is located deep in the womb or on the sides or below where it may be; and it prevents conception and childbirth, and sometimes also the flow of menstrual blood; and its recognition is by the appearance of the vaginal opening. If the obstruction is close at hand, then try with your fingers or a probe to reach it. If it is from thin mucous membrane and it is close at hand on two leaves, then hurry and round it off: put together your two index fingers, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two leaves strongly until the thin mucous membrane is rounded out over the obstruction; then take wool soaked in oil, and place it on the leaf, and have the woman lie on her stomach each day so that it cannot stick together. And if the mucous membrane is hard and thick, then you must cut it away with a scalpel like a laurel leaf. If the obstruction is from born skin, then suspend it with tweezers and cut it away; and have medicines to stop bleeding such as aloe, dragon's blood, incense mixed together with egg white; then apply a wide plaster of lead so that the wound cannot stick together; and do this for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed. And when skin grows in the womb, you must cut it away according to this manner, unless it is enchanted black spots. For one should not touch an enchanted spot that is in the womb out of fear.
des emorroides	Emorroides est une maladie de la partie postérieure de l’anus et du périnée, causée par une dilatation veineuse ou un hémorragie de ces veines. Les symptômes incluent le saignement lors de la défécation, la douleur dans la région anale, et des masses dures à cet endroit.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	**Translation:**
des apostemes de la marris	Of boils of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many kinds of boils come in the anus, such as cancer and hard boils and herpes and hemorrhoids and fistulas and hot boils, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot boil that comes in the anus, which is not one of those boils that grow outside; and if you want to know how to treat it with iron, look first to see if the boil is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it soften until the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on one seat, with two small seats where he can lie down, and support his back and assemble his feet at the level of his thigh; and his thighs should be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then suck out the bag toward the right side, and bring the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the anus, about which comes later its form; and it is necessary that when you want to introduce this instrument, you first stick in the probe to know the depth of the anus, so that what enters into it does not go deeper than it should, nor burn the patient; and if the instrument is too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the anus with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and he must put the funnel of the instrument on top, and dip the instrument. And when the boil opens and you can feel it with your hand, it is necessary to catch it at its head with a spatula; and when the bag is emptied, it is necessary that you put wet lint soaked in rose oil or green oil in the wound; and put the lint at the bottom of the anus, and put some more on top of the anus and on the linen cloth moistened with water where mallows have been cooked; then treat him after two days with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed; and sometimes lift the anus and the wound by washing with water and honey, and then with water in which lily roots and long aristolochia have been cooked; then go back to the ointment. And if the wound closes up in the anus, you must be careful not to cauterize with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is first necessary that the midwife knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the sign is when you see the woman rush downwards, and desires to smell the air; then the child hastens to issue forth; then know that this birth is according to nature's figure, and the afterbirth is under its head, and the membranes with it. And when you see these signs, so it is necessary to press her belly lightly, so that the child issues quickly; for when it settles on its head, so is the afterbirth with it, and the mother is cleansed of her superfluities by good cleansing. And he who comes otherwise does not come naturally; for sometimes he comes on his feet, and comes forth the body or the head, and the hands, or he comes on his belly, or sometimes, and is turned perhaps over his neck, and through other evil figures; so it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in these things, and guard herself from error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes on its head through natural issuance, and the woman labors with grief, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, or let women hold her; and arouse her nature with oil of olive or fenugreek cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the little spatumile of which here is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cleave the afterbirth, and cut with your nail so much that the moisture which is within comes forth; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cleanse the woman with a suppository of fenugreek with oil of sesame. Then make her sneeze with condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be born. And if the two hands come forth first, then you must draw them back little by little, stroke by stroke; and if they cannot be brought back in, then put the woman on a stool, and lift up her feet high. Then turn the stool upside down on the ground, and take hold of the woman so that she does not fall with the turning. And if the hands still cannot be brought back in, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the wrist which is herefore placed, and draw out the child, and draw them back equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	And when the child comes forth on its feet:
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes onto its feet, then one must raise it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it bit by bit until it is even
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one of his feet and stretch it bit by bit
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If he can jump up to the hips, then command him to grab it and make him sneeze
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he jumps, God willing
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he cannot jump as we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it is in its natural shape
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easy
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if he cannot jump as we have said, take mastic of aloe, oil of sesame, and molten gum, and grind them all in one mortar
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put this mixture on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her sit in warm water up to below the ribs
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened underneath, make her a wreath of myrrh and put it under her, leaving it for an hour
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and press her mouth and nose, and gently take hold of her belly, for the child will now jump
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the outlet of the child onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, then gently put your hands on him bit by bit
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then support him on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and let him lie on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and gently fold his hands bit by bit, then put his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions underneath him until she is ready below
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then take his feet and move them suddenly, then move his belly upwards, then put your hands in
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	Pull out the child bit by bit; and tell the woman to push as hard as the child comes out
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the outlet of the child who comes from the thigh, keep one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must engineer to bring back the hand
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and go away
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and forcefully separate her legs
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the mastic I have spoken about;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a seat, then study how to bring back the hand
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and pull out the child according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, then tell her to push as hard as the child comes out
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the outlet of the child on his neck, with his hands spread out and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	Then you must gently pull your hand out, then turn him bit by bit, and carefully pull him out
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when he is aligned, put on the mastic of old wax and oil as we have said, then tell her to move gently bit by bit
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat and tell her to push, then make her sneeze
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out in this way with all the afterbirth, cut the umbilical cord with your nail until all moisture is emptied
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child's face and neck are bent down, cut the umbilical cord from the belly so that it is not retained, otherwise the child will die
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside until you have placed him as he should be, and tell the woman to push once more
adonques si istra legierement.	Then it will come out easily
de l’issue des gemelz	From the outlet of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, although it happens rarely
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live long if they are not named
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they can be multiplied, but they are separated by the sac that divides them, which is attached to the belly
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes they come out just as naturally as one single child
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out crying, then care for them as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled and act quickly and easily
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so in such a way that moves towards health
de plusors enfans	Of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the mother's womb one or two, three or four, five or six, seven or more, up to fifteen, and all are fully formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise Creator
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and therefore the midwife must know all these things, for sometimes such things happen
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	so she should do accordingly
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you care for the woman with a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the previous section, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	then you must know whether the woman has a sound constitution, and whether she is afraid of death or not;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	then the woman should be lying on her back with her thighs inclined downward and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister should pull from two sides where she is attached to the bed so that she is not harmed by the descent of the child;"
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mother's mouth with moist oil mixed with old wax and fennel seed and linseed, then grease the midwife's hands with these oils and mastic;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	"Then place them gently on the mortar, then grind one spot where the ointments should be applied."
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	"And make sure that if the child is dressed, he descends onto his head;"
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	"If you apply ointments in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his throat or under his beard or in his armpit or near the ribs,"
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	"And if descending is on foot, then apply or insert it at the middle of the thighs."
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	"And it is necessary that he spreads the ointment with his right hand, places his left hand's curved part between his two breasts, and gently presses down with his whole hand, applying the ointment to any of these areas we have mentioned until the container is empty;"
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	"And this is the shape of the ointment:"
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	"Then apply another ointment, or a third one if necessary, so that the extractions are equal;"
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	"And then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other so that more can come out, and let the ointment be thickened for better holding, like this is the shape:"
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	"And if some remains, then anoint some of his armpits with oil and place them on that part, and draw the other part;"
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	"And if none remains, then place this ointment or another one higher up, and do this until everything flows out."
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	"And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the extraction,"
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	"then you must wrap a cloth around it until everything comes out;"
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	"Then cut at the joint of the sole or the edge, and do the same for the other hand, and there will be two feet."
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	"And if the child's leg is thick and it is tight at the exit, or if the head is pointed and gathered together,"
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	"then you must place the spine of a small fish between your two breasts, cut the head open, and extract the bone."
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	"or you could round it with the instrument called 'almidach', which is also shaped like the instruments that follow later on in this chapter;"
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	"And do likewise if the child has a large head naturally;"
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	"and then pull out the bones with forceps,"
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	"And if the leg comes out but is still tight at the thigh, cut it open until the muscles of the thigh come out;"
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	"And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces at the thigh so that you can see;"
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	"And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the muscles contract."
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	"And if the child is on its feet, then traction is easy, and directing towards the mouth of the matrix is also easy."
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	"And if it is tight in the belly or at the thigh, you must extract it using one hand wrapped in a cloth;"
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	"and cut the belly or thigh open until the muscles contract;"
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	"And if the other limbs are already extracted but the leg remains,"
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If the physician places his hand deep into the wound, and pulls it out to the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he inserts one or two fingers in place and pulls it out gently.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	But if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by heat-induced inflammation within it, then do not attempt to manipulate it
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	but rather apply moist and fatty substances
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and use plasters that are softened, and especially those soaked in warm water to soften them
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is lying on his side, and you cannot lay him flat, then treat him as we have said for a living child
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	but if one lacks the strength to do so, then pull it out piece by piece and leave nothing of the afterbirth behind
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And once you have done this, treat heat-induced inflammation in wounds as we have said
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, apply cold water to constrain it, and then use other remedies
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb contained an infant that had died, then another infant became lodged on top of it and also died
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she developed inflammation in her vulva which swelled so much that it opened up and began to emit a foul odor
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat her, but after pondering for a long time, I could not heal the wound
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster and an bone emerged, then after several days another one appeared
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished by this, for the womb has no bones
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I concluded that they were bones from a dead infant
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I cleaned the wound and removed many bones until the woman recovered well;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	"And the woman bore a child for many days, and then gave birth to a small amount of water."
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	"And I have recorded this chapter first so that when the master finds something unfamiliar, he knows how to provide assistance."
dou ramener la marris a son leu	"to bring the dislocation back into place"
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the shape of the presser, to which one applies the books; and at two turns for each of the two heads of the two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more delicate than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	"And let the mouth of the funnel be two fingers wide,
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	"And between the two limbs, there should be two bindings of this same material, closed at both ends with a length of half a palm or slightly more."
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	"And these two bindings are passed through the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns."
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, similar but more refined and lighter, should be made from ebony or boxwood, resembling tongs;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	"And let it have two joints, two articulations, each one a palm's length, and two fingers' width."
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	"And when you see the membrane open all around the instrument, then make the woman sit on one bed, with her feet hanging and legs spread apart,"
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	"then insert the two articulations joined together into the membrane, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs;"
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	"then open your hand around the entire instrument, just as you would with forceps evenly, according to how much you see the mouth of the membrane open, until the child does what it wants."
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	"These instruments are all mounted, and their appearances are multiplied. When the surgeon has prepared them, the operation is performed more quickly, and the instruments are taller for men because of their size."
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	"Do not disdain the instrument until you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable."
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	"When the membranes are retained at childbirth, you must command the sick woman to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with camphor water, and restrain her hands over her mouth and nose;"
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	"And if she faints because of this, so much the better."
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	"If not, then take a pot and make one hole in the cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the membrane inside it, such as celery, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centory;"
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	"all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in the pot with water over the fire. Then put one end of a tube into the hole of the pot and the other end into the mouth of the membrane;"
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	"and let it remain like that until the steam enters the membrane. Then make her sneeze, as we have said."
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	"If the membranes are expelled quickly."
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	"And if the membranes remain after this treatment and are not expelled, then command the woman to moist her left hand in oil of sesame or in mucus of althea, and then put it into the birth canal,"
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	"and search for the membranes. When she finds them, let her take them and stretch them out little by little, so that the membrane does not tear during extraction;"
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	"but she must move it gently to the right and left, then pull it; thus it will come out and disentangle itself."
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	"And if the mouth of the membrane is very narrow, we have spoken about the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;"
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	"But if none of these treatments work, then be sure not to pull too hard;"
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	"but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the membrane be tied to the woman's hip, then she should be given an enema with tetraplacenta oil;"
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	"So that she can push and remove it, and expel it. But nevertheless, when she pushes, if a bad smell comes to her stomach and head, and makes the woman ill."
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	"Therefore, suitable fumigations must be used for this purpose. None of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs."
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	"The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of the flowers and membranes is as follows:"
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	"It resembles a tube made of glass, with the narrow end placed in the birth canal and the wide ends held over the fire;"
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	"And let the fumigation be done over hot coals until she is gassed, then begin another one."
de percier lou fondement	"to pierce the anus"
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	"Many children are born without having their anus pierced, but they have been blocked by a subtle synechia:"
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	"Therefore, the midwife must pierce this synechia with her finger and not use a sharp instrument to avoid injury, and clean the opening so that she does not touch it;"
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"then put on a cloth moistened in wine and oil, then continue with the oil treatment until it is healed."
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	"And if you doubt that it has not healed, then place a tube of lead in the opening and leave it there for a few days, removing it when the child is ready to be taken to its room."
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	"Sometimes this obstruction occurs suddenly due to a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cut off that growth: it should be cured as we have said for the lead tube."
de la fistule dou fondement	"of the fistula of the anus"
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	"Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come from near the anus or in the space of the two buttocks,"
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	"If there is one fistula or more. And when that nodular fistula is old, it opens up and becomes moist with white pus or thin bowels,"
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	"and sometimes these fistulas are perforating, and they are recognized by the fact that there is evacuation or wind during defecation when the patient has a bowel movement, and occasionally a worm comes out."
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	"And there are fistulas that pierce up to the bladder and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint and up to the knee."
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	"Thus one recognizes a perforating fistula of the anus that is not perforating:"
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	"And it is when you put your index finger in the anus and insert a fine needle made of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity."
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	"And if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin lead tube or a horsehair until you feel the tube or hair with your finger;"
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	"and if you do not feel it and nothing comes out of the opening, neither evacuations nor wind nor worms, as we have said:"
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	"know that it does not pierce, so hasten to treat it."
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And when the fistula is perforating up to the bladder or up to the urethra, urine comes out of it and cannot be healed by medications."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	"If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tube will come out at that spot;"
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	"if there is no tortuosity and there is constant pain around it, then it constantly emits bowels, and neither medication nor healing by ointment will help;"
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	"and in these perforating fistulas there is no other cure than surgery, and the foolishness of those who meddle with them."
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	"In that which is not perforating and is not old, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have proven,"
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	"And it is that the patient lies on their stomach between your hands and raises their legs up to their hips, with their hips inclined towards their belly;"
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	"then insert an iron or lead tube until you know where the tube comes out."
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	"If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your two index fingers in there,"
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	"then feel that the tube has pierced it; and if you feel between your finger the synechia or the flesh, then know that it is perforating;"
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	"but do not work on it unless one can heal it."
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	"It is said that sometimes they can be healed, but this happens rarely;"
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	"And the aid given there is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before;"
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	"And heat the cautery iron until it is hot enough to reach near the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that these broken veins have been burned, which resemble an feathers of birds."
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	"And then cauterize the wet tents until that vein bursts forth, then apply the ointment around the vein and bind it tightly."
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	"If it is cured in this way, that's good. If not, it cannot be cured any other way;"
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	"If the tent enters and does not pierce all the way to the thumb which is at the fundament, and between your two fingers there is a thick layer of flesh or skin, and you see that the fistula passes beneath this covering towards the heart;"
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	"If the opening of the beginning of the fistula is close by and you push the tent in further ahead, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the head of the tent;"
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	"And the tent will be freed and fall out; then dress those broken veins that resemble feathers of birds, so that none remain."
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	"If the sinew breaks and tears between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or strong medicine."
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	"For the cautery of fire serves two purposes: it burns these adjoining veins together and stops the flow of blood and dries up the moisture."
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	"Then cauterize with moist tents or crushed substances until the place yields and bursts forth, and the burned vein appears in the wound;"
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	"Then treat the wound with ointments that bind tightly and harden the flesh, these are dry medicines."
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	"For when it is cauterized in this way, it is truly cured and does not return."
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	"And if the fistula comes right down from the fundament and is far from the body, push your thumb into the fundament and search for it."
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	"If you feel the tent and between your two fingers there is skin or flesh where it is about to pierce, then there should be no hesitation or doubt in using one of these three methods:"
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	"either you cauterize it as we have described, or cut it all the way through, or if you cannot push in tents, then treat it as mentioned first;"
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	"but do not cut too deeply lest you cut into the tissue that holds the fundament and cause involuntary evacuation;"
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	"then treat it as we have described;"
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	"perhaps it will be cured, or you can push aside that covering and clean it after cutting near the fundament with a tent or another pointed instrument;"
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	"then dress that broken vein in the wound as much as you can;"
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	"then strive to heal the wound and keep the fistula away from the fundament: this will be easier for the patient."
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	"And some fistulas are like this: when you insert the tent into the fistula, it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above;"
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	"If you take a tent with a hole at the tip like this:"
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	"And tie one end of a thread to the top of the tent, then insert the tent all the way into the fistula until it reaches its tip."
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	"If it passes through to the edge of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that hole so that you can insert your thumb into the fundament;"
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	"then pull on the end of the thread and bring the two ends together, tie them tightly together, and leave it for one or two days;"
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	"And sometimes tie it again until the thread cuts through those tissues between them and closes up;"
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	"then treat the wound until it is healed."
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	"If the fistula does not burst open on its own, make it do so by any means you can, unless it is too deep."
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"For it would not be good to cut too deeply and then treat it as we have described until it is healed;"
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	"The shape of the pointed spatula used to open a fistula is most often like this:"
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	"And on the other side it has no point so that you do not cut what should not be cut, as shown here:"
des emorroydes	"hemorrhoids"
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Fear is of two kinds: either it resides within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are both small and large ones; blood also flows from the surface.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And there is one or more [emorrydes], which lack the foundation and are at the head of the foundation; but those that lack so much have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And on the surface there is either a small amount of clear water or a small amount of blood, and they have the color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have [emorrydes] within the foundation is that you should command the patient to walk in rooms until the foundation is expelled from them, and then their children will appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	Then hurry, and grasp it with tweezers or pull it out with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	"However, if the sinews cannot hold them due to moisture, take them with one cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamlet."
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	"And pull them with your two hands, then cut them and sprinkle on some hot powders that are in place of cautery."
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	"Or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other remedies until they are sound."
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	"If the foundation cannot come out, then perform a cleansing enema on the patient using a biting and sharp laxative to wash what is in the fundament so that it can come out openly."
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	"If the patient strains, and if the threads are far from the fundament, then the treatment is easy."
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	"And it is that you grasp them with your nail or with forceps and cut them, then treat them as we have said until they are sound and the patient fears incision by iron."
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	"Then you must arrange the stitching in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle."
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	"and it should be loose; and tie the thread firmly, then knot the thread and remove the needle, and do this for all of them, leaving one untied to correct any excess blood."
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	"then place one moistened cloth in rose oil or wax on the fundament and put it on top of the fundament, and tell the patient to rest;"
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"and leave him alone until he defecates; then treat them with ointments and other remedies until they are sound."
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	"For the drying of the fissure in the fundament:"
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	"Often times a fissure occurs in the intestines due to drying, and this can happen naturally or when the patient is old and medication is ineffective."
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	"Then you should use the tip of a spatula or your nail to remove the scab above it without letting it get wet;"
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	"then treat it until it is healed as necessary;"
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	"And if it does not heal, then begin scraping more forcefully than before until it heals and becomes scabbed over;"
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"then treat it until it is healed."
dou fremit	"For trembling:"
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	"A mouse is a small creature that runs throughout the body;"
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	"and sometimes it causes trembling and coldness, which can be felt throughout the entire body, but more often in the hands than other parts."
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	"The treatment is to take a feather from an eagle or a large owl and place it on the trembling area until the circle around it becomes warm;"
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	"then twist your hand around the feather all the way around the trembling area and place it throughout the body to reach its roots and remove the trembling from them."
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	"And if you wish to do this with a feather of brass or iron, then do it in this manner, and make sure that it is thin underneath and sharp above:"
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	"Do not pierce too deeply so as not to hurt the fingers or cause them to bleed. And if you wish, cauterize the trembling area, just as it is described in the chapter on cautery."
de la forme dou clistere	"Of the form of a clyster:"
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	"Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or lead, or molten brass or wax; and sometimes they are made of these small or large instruments, according to their size."
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	"Therefore, those that are used for the treatment of children and those who are weak and sickly should be small;"
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	"The form of a small or large clyster is as follows: wide where the belly is bound according to this manner:"
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	"And there should be an opening where the belly is bound, so that you can see it, and the waste should be pierced inside, and there should be two holes on one side and one hole on the other;"
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	"And the belly where the medicine is placed should be made of an animal bladder or parchment and pierced all around with small holes;"
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	"And there should be one nut of spice between each hole, then insert a strong thread made from thick wool twisted in ten or more turns into each hole and sew up the belly like a goat."
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	"And once the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread before performing the clyster;"
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	"And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold and grease the end of the clyster with oil or melted beeswax or something similar before gently inserting it;"
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	"Then the minister should press with both hands together until it is completely inserted, then remove the clyster and lift up the patient's legs at the side;"
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	"And if the medicine threatens to come out, then tie it in place as best you can. And if he lies still for the whole night, then it is even more beneficial."
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if you perform a clyster in an illness where the belly is inflamed and the medicine rushes out quickly, then repeat it until it is healed."
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	"And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or an aposteme, then use a clyster that is as thin as one for a child;"
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	"This is the form of a thin clyster where the skin is stretched taut:"
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	"We have already discussed in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines according to their fulfillment."
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	"I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and what they are made with."
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	"The things by which wounds are made are: a blow from a stone, a cut from a sword or dagger or spear or club or similar thing;"
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	"or wounds made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or head, or thigh, or belly, or liver, and similar members;"
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	"And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, since the memory will come in its chapter."
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	"I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, then make sure if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar thing, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large,"
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	"and if it is a hot aposteme, then perform cupping immediately using the cephalic vein directly above the wound if possible, and make sure that the cupping is performed on the opposite side of the injured part;"
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	"And avoid letting the patient consume wine or heavy foods."
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	"And if he cannot tolerate cupping, then reduce his diet and do not let him drink wine or eat meat;"
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	"And place on the wound, if a hot aposteme comes, cotton moistened only with rose oil or with wine that has been thickened;"
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	"And if there is no hot aposteme, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and has not been moved by air, powder that I will describe a little later;"
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the air has moved it, then place on it some ointments until it is healed."
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like one from a sword cut and similar ones, and its lips cannot be brought together by binding alone, then bring them together by stitching, as I shall say regarding wounds of the belly, concerning stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is open to the bone, gaping and barely attached except for a small portion, then cut it away; afterwards treat the wound with medication, and replace lost skin with toughened leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And order the patient to eat substantial foods like testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	If you find rotten skin but not reaching the bone, then cut away all the rotted flesh and discard it, then dress the wound
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery or vein in the wound which cannot be controlled by medication alone, then tie off the artery and if you find it dislocated, suture it with a thread
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, cauterize it
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then their care is easy; you should place in this powder which binds before the art has moved it
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of preparing the powder is as follows: take incense for one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind them together finely
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply it to the wound, pressing strongly until the wound closes well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then let it sit well, and leave it without loosening, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Sometimes heat alone is applied when incense or dragon's blood are not available, but only after the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the physician has moved the wound, even in summer, then one does not put this powder there at all;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	"However, apply some digested ointments or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey until it swells."
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Then perform other treatments until they are healed."
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	"And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then remove it with delicate forceps;"
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	"and I will tell you about skull fractures afterward."
de la plaie dou col	"of the neck wound"
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	"If a wound comes on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut."
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	"If it is the nerve, there is no other treatment but to leave it alone and not apply anything constricting, because it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat;"
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	"and do not apply anything cold to the wound because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuity goes with the brain, which is the highest organ;"
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	"but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water mixed with rose oil and cooked water also in soft water,"
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	"and other similar things according to this manner, and moist compresses."
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the wound is large, then suture and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals."
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	"And if the wounds are deep, filled with pus and full of bowels, then pierce them lower down;"
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	"and if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs profusely, then tie it off, ligate it, and cauterize it if necessary;"
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	"And if the windpipe or the heart is cut, but the vessels that carry the flesh are preserved,"
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	"then suture the heart to the spine of the neck, and do not touch the windpipe, but put it back according to its natural shape;"
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	"and then bind it carefully, leaving it for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until it heals;"
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	"And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then scrape it."
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	"and if there are bone fragments, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound putrefies,"
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	"and then evacuate and ligate the discharge;"
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	"And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder that I have mentioned."
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	"And if there are bones and fistulas in the wound, then treat it as I said in its chapter."
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	"on wounds from a lance or a dagger"
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	"If it is a wound from a lance or dagger and the wound is deep, then observe if there are any signs of wind escaping from the wound where the patient inhales: know then that the wound is mortal;"
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	"and if it is not deep but fresh with blood throughout its length, then do not apply the powder at first or tie it to prevent the blood from flowing out."
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	"and go back to the heart and kill him;"
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	"but apply an attractive ointment there twice a day,"
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	"And if you have no ointment, then put some lint cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture."
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	"and make the patient lie on the wound for three days or four or more;"
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	"So that no spasm comes of it, nor evil trembling of the heart nor attacks of breathing;"
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	"and when you see these good signs, know then that the wound is saved."
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"So treat it with compresses and other remedies until it heals;"
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	"And if it cannot heal nor close up, know then that there is a fistula present; so treat it as one should."
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	"And if the wound is from an incision made by sword or dagger and is clean, whether it is on the front or back, then treat it as those that are in front;"
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	"If it is large, then stitch it up; and if it is small, sprinkle powder on it. And if it is close to the bone and has cut off fragments of bone, scrape the wound clean and remove all foreign bodies if they are visible;"
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	"and if they are not visible, then leave the wound to putrefy, and ligate the discharge;"
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	"And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said."
dou derrompement dou ventre	"on rupture of the abdomen"
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	"The rupture of the abdomen may be large or medium-sized or small;"
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	"from a large wound some portions of the intestine or bowel often protrude through it;"
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	"And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound causes worse harm than the larger one;"
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	"for if one does not carefully replace them intestine by intestine they will slip back in again;"
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	"for as soon as the intestines feel the cold air they swell up and slip back more easily;"
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	"And also because the middle-sized wound is often worse than others, because many portions of the intestine are torn off at their place rather than between two;"
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	"And know that a rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways:"
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	"The two common sutures happen during abdominal surgery,"
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	"And the stitching of other wounds on the body, plus two other stitches are common to other wounds."
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	"Still, they are more appropriate with abdominal stitches, and I will discuss each one and explain them."
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	"I say that when the wound is small, and none of the intestines have protruded,"
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	"and there is no urgency to reset it, then this is done in one of two ways:"
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	"either because the wound is small, as we have said,"
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	"or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold."
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	"And when it is cold, heat it in this way:"
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	"Moisten a sponge or one soft cloth in boiling water only,"
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	"or you cook in hot water with salt and cumin."
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	"And raise the intestines until the swelling has gone away;"
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	"and then apply this binding wine to draw it out."
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	"And when you see the swelling starting to disappear, moistening the intestines with water or decocted mallows,"
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	"for by this means the entrance is relieved somewhat;"
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	"And if it still cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;"
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	"and the first dressing is one that draws out the wound,"
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	"which no one should cut into without great necessity."
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	"And this is the instrument for splitting it open:"
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	"Thus cut inside in the curve and do not turn back, as shown here:"
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	"And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines have protruded,"
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	"then replace them according to their natural form in their proper place;"
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	"If you are able to do this, for it is most useful."
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	"When the wound is large and is located below the belly,"
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	"then you must make the patient lie on his back;"
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	"And place his legs higher than his head."
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	"And if it is located below the belly,"
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	"then raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts;"
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	"And also, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two sides,"
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	"then ensure that the wounded side is higher than the other."
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	"And thus one must arrange what I say for large and medium-sized wounds."
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	"For small wounds, apply what you have been equipped with,"
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	"then have between your hands one pitiful minister who will remove all the rupture from his hand."
et assemble les levres;	"And bring together the lips;"
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	"This is the common manner of suturing,"
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	"And it is that you take one needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,"
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	"then leave two fingers' space from the beginning of the wound, and there insert one needle with a good strong thread;"
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	"And pierce the two ends of the skin together with the two ends of the syringe;"
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	"which is beneath the skin inside, until you have pierced it from that side;"
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	"And bring together the two ends of the syringe, one on top of the other;"
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	"then pull it taut with a doubled thread on either side of the needle;"
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	"then bring together the two ends of the wound evenly,"
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	"And then leave two fingers' space and insert another needle;"
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	"then tie it with thread just as you did the first needle;"
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	"And continue to do this according to how many needles you need;"
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	"until all the wound is closed up;"
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	"And let the needles be moderate, neither too fine nor too thick;"
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	"for fine needles seize all the flesh, and large ones cannot penetrate well enough:"
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	"That is why they must be moderate."
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	"And it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin,"
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	"for they seize and open up the wound before the suture;"
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	"And then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping,"
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	"And place tents or bandages on the ends of the needles for better support;"
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	"and leave them in place until the wound is healed."
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	"And this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds;"
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	"for it suffices to use one or two needles there."
Li seconde costure si est commune,	"The second suture is common,"
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	"And it is to bring together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the syringe together with one needle, on which there is a medium-strength thread;"
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	"And when you have pierced all these ends together,"
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	"then turn the needle back on itself at the point where you began, in the manner of sewing cloth;"
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	"And leave the thickness of a goose's egg between each suture;"
ceste costure sevent li home,	"This suture is used by people,"
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	"I sewed a wound that one man had in his belly,"
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	"who was wounded with a knife,"
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	"And the wound was more than a palm's length long;"
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	"And it opened into the intestines for about two palms' length;"
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	"And the wound was in his belly."
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	"I brought back the intestine and it was twenty-four hours later,"
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	"And the wound healed in fifteen days, and I dressed it, and he recovered."
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	"And the doctors had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle;"
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	"And I did not dress the wound with ointment because there were none to be found in that place, nor any medicines."
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	"And I put old cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until he was healed."
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	"Now I will tell you the two proper manners of suturing:"
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	"Take the needle and push it from the outside to the inside;"
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	"When the needle has pierced the heart directly, then leave the end of the syringe where you pushed the needle;"
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	"And pierce it again from the inside to the outside on another point;"
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	"The purpose of this suture is that you sew like a furrier sews pelts,"
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	"And that you leave the syringe once on one side and take it up again on another, so that the suture is completely finished."
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	"The second manner of suturing, which Galen speaks of properly,"
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	"is when some people bring the two ends together naturally;"
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	"And apply one end of the syringe to the other end in this manner:"
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	"Insert a needle into the nearest midpoint and pierce only that point;"
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	"And leave the two ends of the syringe;"
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	"Then turn the needle back and pierce it from the outside to the inside;"
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	"as you did for the two ends of the syringe;"
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	"Then pierce both from the outside to the inside in two other midpoints that are on the other side;"
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	"And this is the most common and best manner of suturing."
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	"Galen said these words, and some testify to it,"
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	"That one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread;"
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	"And one needle should be pushed in from one side and the other from another, like those who sew gutta-percha;"
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	"And know that when the intestine is inside the belly,"
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	"the suture is more difficult than in other places on the belly."
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	"The judgment of a wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:"
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	"And that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood before it has moved;"
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If one resets the intestines, and the wound is closed; then place powder around the flesh.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	And if the wound has moved, then apply some ointment that is present until the wound is bowed.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	And tie the stitches, and let the skin be closed, and the flesh.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicine, then apply [it], as soon as it begins to discharge pus or blood, old cotton.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you need no other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary that you moisturize light linen in warm tempered oil or rose oil
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and apply it around the angles and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, which happens many times,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If black wine enema causes pain, especially if the corruption reaches the intestines
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierces inside, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal if it is injured
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and because of the thinness of its walls and the subtlety of its entire body, and its proximity to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the zebra jumps from the wound, it should be replaced just like the intestine while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has turned black or become worms, then you should tie off the blackened part so that no blood flows there
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries there;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligature
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place two clamps dangling from below the wound up to the front to facilitate the extraction when the zebra falls and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is round and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored in some men
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	For I saw a man wounded in the belly with a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it swelled and became a fistula, through which there issued pus and wind;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated him as well as I could until he was healed, and the place was sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healed, I doubted that the patient did not have some illness in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	"There was no harm done, but it remained in better positions, eating and drinking."
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	"And some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be tied in this manner:"
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	"Take large threads and then bring together the lips of the wound,"
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	"and when the thread has opened the mouth, then put it on the two lips,"
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	"So that it pulls its mouth open;"
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	"And then cut off its head so that it cannot untie itself,"
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	"then put another thread in the same way as before until the wound is completely closed;"
et cout la plaie.	"And then sew up the wound."
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	"These heads grow again in the intestines and cause no harm to the sick person,"
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	"And one can tie the intestines with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine,"
en teil maniere:	"So that:"
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	"Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very lean,"
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	"And then tie to the head of this thread one twist of thin linen thread,"
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	"Then put the thread through the needle and sew up the intestines, folding it into the incision;"
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	"And this method of sewing with threads is no further than according to the way of faith and hope."
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	"And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no skill nor healing except subtlety."
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	"whether it is a fistula or wherever it may be,"
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	"It should be known that every wound or boil, when it grows old, is universally called a 'fistula.'"
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	"And especially when it is deep and goes inwards."
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	"A fistula is according to the true definition a hard and white knot or node where there is no pain felt,"
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	"And it is also deep like the quill of a bird;"
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	"and sometimes it goes out clear and straight, and other times it is thick;"
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	"sometimes it is small, and other times quite large;"
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	"I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound which does not heal and has no flesh,"
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	"is only because of one of the seven causes:"
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	"That is to say, due to the thinness of blood or body;"
ou por sa malice;	"or because of its wickedness;"
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	"or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips which does not allow new flesh to grow;"
ou il i a trop de bowe;	"or because of too much depth;"
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	"or because the wound is porous and the material is of poor quality;"
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	"or because the medicine used for treatment is not good."
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	"or because the corruption is in a manner of pestilence,"
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	"or because of the property in the region where digestion is slow, and healing is delayed by nature."
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	"or because there are veins or bones present:"
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	"I have already shown all these causes, signs, and remedies for medicine in the division."
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	"Now it is fitting that I tell you about the cure of fistula which is done by manual work:"
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	"It should be known that fistula occurs in all parts of the body;"
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	"for there are fistulas which come from large veins and arteries, and nerves,"
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	"or in the sinew, intestines, bladder, or some of the ribs,"
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	"Or for the spine of the back, or for any joint of the hands or feet;"
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	"And if it comes to the property of the main member, and similar places."
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	"And all fistulas that are of this manner are of harsh healing, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;"
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	"And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have mentioned, you can trust its cure,"
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	"and recognize it if you please, take a tent of iron or bronze, if the fistula is straight, put it there;"
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	"And if the fistula is twisted, seek one with a subtle lead plate,"
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	"because lead bends more around the twistiness;"
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	"And if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot properly search it with tents,"
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	"then use a clyster through one of the perforations."
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	"for moisture cuts from one perforation to another and cleanses it;"
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	"then search for the source of its bleeding as much as you know if there is bone or nerve involved and how deeply it is embedded;"
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	"And ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it;"
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	"and once you truly know where it is located, whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein,"
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	"then cut according to what I have told you."
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	"And remove the faulty flesh and rotting tissue that is inside;"
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	"And then dress it until it is healed,"
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	"But if the fistula is very deep from a straight place, you must cut deeply as far as you can;"
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	"then insert moistened tents medicated with hot water and bring them up to the head of the fistula,"
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	"until the medication corrodes the remaining surplus at the bottom;"
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"And then apply fresh bandages soaked in healing oil until it is healed."
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	"And if it does not heal with this method, then cauterize it as we have said,"
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	"But if the bone is rotted by the fistula, cut it."
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	"If veins or nerves do not bother you in the main limbs, as we have said;"
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	"And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it clean until all the corruption is removed;"
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	"then dress it with fresh bandages until it is healed."
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	"But if it does not heal, then retreat backwards as before,"
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	"So that you know you have not gone too far:"
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	"If you uncover and search until you reach the bottom,"
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	"And remove all the corruption, then close up the area;"
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	"And if it heals this way, that's good."
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	"But if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;"
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	"So there is no other remedy but to leave it alone:"
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	"And if there is a small rotted bone that you can grasp with forceps,"
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	"extract it using an appropriate instrument;"
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	"If there are many bones, crush them all and leave none behind;"
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	"And if the moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear,"
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	"then cut through moisture, flesh, and bone, and expose the bones."
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	"And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then apply something moist to the wound to promote rottenness,"
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	"and leave it until the area around the bones has rotted;"
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	"And then you will have easier access to remove the bones."
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	"And if it is a large bone such as those in the thigh or calf,"
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	"scrape away the corruption until all the blackness is removed;"
puis restoure la plaie;	"then close up the wound."
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	"And if there is much corrupted flesh extending to the bone marrow,"
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	"It must be scraped clean down to the corruption and then dressed until it heals;"
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	"And I will tell you about a fistula that happened in one man's leg,"
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	"So that you may take an example and aid yourself in your work."
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	"A young man of about thirty years had pain in his leg due to some cause inside his body;"
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	"so that the matter came into his leg and formed an abscess without any apparent cause for opening it;"
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	"But the physicians foolishly probed so much that the abscess opened;"
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	"And as they removed much matter, it became a fistula with many openings through which flowed much pus and moisture from the body;"
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	"and many doctors treated him for about two years, but none of them knew anything about the art of surgery;"
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	"So I was called in and saw his leg and the treatments they were using;"
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	"And the large amount of pus flowing from the openings;"
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	"The young man's body turned red and had a yellowish hue."
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	"I inserted a tent into one of the openings and then searched for all the others;"
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	"And found that some opened against each other in every part of the leg."
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	"So I quickly cut into one opening until I exposed a part of the bone,"
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	"and found that it was rotted and pierced through to the bone inside;"
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	"I scraped away what I could see of the rotted bone and thought that there was no other corruption besides what I had removed;"
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	"But as soon as I began to dress it with healing medicines over time, it would not heal;"
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	"and when I reopened it, I exposed the bone again just like before;"
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	"I found that the corruption had spread further into the bone, scraped it clean, and then removed it, and tried to heal the area;"
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	"But I could not make it heal until I cut around about a palm's width of bone, exposing its entire marrow;"
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	"then dressed it with medicines, and it healed quickly."
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	"And there was no need to reopen the wound except for the weakness of the patient who could not tolerate it;"
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	"and my fear that he might die."
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	"For he often bled from evacuation, but he was completely healed in the end;"
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	"And in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and he was well-disposed with no harm or trouble afterwards, either then or later."
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	"And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be set in this manner:"
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	"Take a splint and attach it to the head of the exposed bone,"
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	"And command someone to hold it extended upwards;"
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	"Then take another thicker linen bandage and wrap it around the flesh above the bone,"
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	"And extend the head of the splint so that you can pull out the corrupted flesh from underneath;"
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	"And uncover the flesh above the wound so that the bone does not rub against it and cause injury;"
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	"Then place a hot iron or a stone slab underneath the bone to help burn away corrupted flesh;"
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	"And continue doing this until you can see and feel that all the corruption is gone, then repeat once more."
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	"If a bone has rotted but not yet opened up, and the corruption is in the middle or in some part,"
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	"Then uncover all the flesh around it and place a hot iron underneath;"
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	"And then scrape away the corruption from one part to another with an instrument about the length of the corruption, as we have said;"
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	"If the corruption is at a joint, cut out the corrupted joint and scrape away the bone around it from another side;"
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	"And if corruption is present in the continuity of two joints, then there is no other remedy than cauterization."
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	"And if corruption is found at the wrist of the hand or at the ankle, it is very severe."
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	But nevertheless you must inquire about this wound, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way that you can, but without the vein or nerve causing resistance.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that there are many ways to cut and shape these bones according to their arrangement and appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their thickness and their fineness,
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore one must prepare for each type of work its own instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	Also know that the work will show you the tool with which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And witness to the ways of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you think about the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The flesh rots either due to an internal cause or due to a lack of warmth;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have medicated this corruption with the treatment of medicines, and they do not help at all.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	Then it is necessary to cover that limb up to where the corruption occurs
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	So that the patient escapes from death or from the greater evil of losing the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the sign is that the limb becomes black as if it had been burnt by fire;
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	After the blackening, then that corruption spreads from member to member
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	And spreads throughout the body; so hurry to cover it
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	And if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts such as sea scorptions and vipers and similar ones
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the corruption is at the top of the thigh, cover it and do not let it come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, cover it at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it reaches the arm, cover it above the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is too late.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And there are no remedies so powerful that their quantity cannot overcome them
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And likewise when the corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cover it after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	And if it reaches the foot, cover the whole foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	"And if it goes up to the leg, it cuts at the knee joint;"
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	"And if it comes upon the knee, there is no other recourse but to let the patient die."
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	"and the method of covering or supporting the limb is to tie it above and below,"
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	"And extend one bandage downwards from one of the ties, and another upwards from the other tie,"
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	"and you remove the flesh between the two ties up to about an inch wide so that the bone is exposed."
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	"then cover or bind it, and place a linen cloth on each side so that the bandage does not touch the healthy flesh,"
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	"And if the patient suffers from another injury or wound."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	"And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize it immediately,"
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	"or apply some constricting powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete."
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	"then bind the wounded limb with a proper tie and care for it until it is healed,"
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	"I will tell you what happened to one man."
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	"a blackness that seemed like burnt with fire,"
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	"And this corruption first appeared on his big toe of his foot, spreading to cover the entire foot."
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	"and when the man saw the corruption, he quickly covered the foot and it became healed."
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	"And some time later, the corruption reappeared on his hand's big toe, and he came to me,"
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	"I applied things that caused blisters after cleansing his body, but I could not stop the corruption."
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	"and he asked me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to because I hoped that the matter would be blistered away,"
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	"I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he might die."
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	"for the man's strength was weak; he became completely discouraged and returned home,"
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	"and quickly covered his hand and it became healed."
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	"And I have told you this story only so that others may do likewise when there is need."
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	"Sometimes an ulcer occurs in the flesh and remains for such a long time that it collects a large amount of pus,"
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	"And then it grows round and bursts open, releasing the pus like water from a vase."
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	"And the skin above is as thin as fine muslin,"
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	"and they do not reach down to the bone or nerve, and such an illness is called 'healthy.'"
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	"It is not called a 'fistula';"
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	"But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone deeply, then it is called 'fistula'."
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	"And the skin should be cut all around, and even more so if it is thin, like a piece of cloth;"
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	"and do not worry about its corruption."
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	"And if you think the skin will tear and the corruption is deep inside,"
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	"If the skin is thick with flesh, cut it like this:"
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	"Observe if the breast is large and the belly that accompanies it has a foul odor,"
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	"Then perform an Egyptian clister made like this:"
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	"Take equal parts of hyssop, oil, and lead, and place them in one vessel over the fire,"
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	"until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey;"
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	"Then take some of it according to your need and mix it with water and honey,"
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	"And use this mixture to perform the enema on the breast, closing the opening."
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	"And leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;"
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	"Do this repeatedly until the breast is softened and the stench is removed."
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	"Finally, perform an enema with water and ashes,"
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	"When this medicine is not available, take some ashes from burnt grapevine wood, and pour water over it,"
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	"Then strain it and use it for an enema until you know that the breast is well cleaned."
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	"And if the patient cannot tolerate this treatment, or neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water and ashes,"
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	"Then use an enema of water and honey with a little bit of crushed lead;"
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	"Or use an enema of honey mixed with wine that has the property to cleanse and wash,"
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	"And let the wine make the flesh shrivel."
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	"And once this is done, if you are confident that the breast has been well cleaned,"
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	"Then perform an enema with medicine that promotes flesh growth,"
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	"And take some diachylon plaster and mix it with rose oil and wine;"
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	"Or use an enema with other medicines and oils that I have mentioned earlier in treating oils."
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	"And if the opening of the breast is too small for the nozzle of the enema to enter,"
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	"Then carefully widen it with an iron probe and insert a wick soaked in Egyptian oil;"
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	'Or basilicon oil, until it is widened."
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	"And if the wound is too wide, then fold and leave only enough space for the enema to enter;"
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	"And if the hole that the bow makes is above, then cover it with a cloth or place something below it."
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	"For when the bow is inserted deep, do not let any flesh enter;"
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	"And if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish,"
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	"Then arrange it so that the bow points towards the lowest point where it is inserted."
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	"For when the bow is inserted deep, do not let any flesh enter;"
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	"And if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish,"
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	"Then arrange it so that the bow points slightly downward and nothing of the bow remains inside;"
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	"And take some consolidative medicines to apply on the breast,"
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	"And then place a linen cloth over the entire breast;"
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	"Then tie tightly around the opening of the breast, using a bandage that is slightly wider than the first one;"
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	"Then apply a soothing oil on another cloth according to the size of the opening,"
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	"And place this cloth over the opening of the breast to ease the pain of the bowels, but do not remove the outer linen bandage except once after many days."
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	"Remove the cloth covering the opening of the breast frequently in order to remove the bowels,"
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	"And know what comes out from the bowels: whether it is venomous or little or enough, digested or undigested;"
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	"Be cautious if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not,"
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	"And when this treatment has been applied in such manner for several days, observe the nature of the discharge that comes out from the opening of the breast;"
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	"Then know that the breast is becoming hardened and approaching healing;"
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	"And then untie it in the morning or on the third day, and when you open the wound,"
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	"Then change another cloth and renew the ointment."
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	"And if after many days the breast still discharges undigested bowels, know that the breast has not yet healed."
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	"But if subtle poisons come out after a long time, do not despair of healing,"
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	"For healing is approaching. There are people for whom the insertion of flesh into their wounds takes a long time, and others for whom it happens quickly;"
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	"And if undigested bowels continue to come out from the breast after many days, know that the breast has not yet healed."
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	"But if the breast is slow to harden and remains moist, then apply medicines that are dry in substance but moistening in virtue;"
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	"Such as Egyptian oil, for it contains much vitriol, which is the last medicine."
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	"Take Egyptian oil and mix it with rose oil and old wine in equal amounts;"
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	"Then cook this mixture together until it thickens, and use it; also honey cooked and increased does better."
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	"If Egyptian oil is not available,"
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And you take myrrh and aloe wood and incense, grind them, and mix their powder with honey while it's on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then dip one cloth in it, place it on the breast, and apply it several times a day, administering an ointment at length
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestine lily, which is also like wheat flour and millet flour;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And in the use of simples or composites: grind them, make them into powder, mix them with honey that I mentioned earlier, and apply them;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the treatment is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption has gone deep, and has impressed upon the bone, or in hard members, or in joints;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if it is a fistula treatment, just as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the boil of the fingernail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is a boil that arises under the fingernail of the thumb
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or of the foot, or perhaps arises on other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is old and one doesn't pay attention to it, then a black boil appears
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and burst so much that they reach the root of the nail, sometimes even reaching all the way to the tip;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corruption comes as far as the bone, with painful stench, and the skin around the nail is swollen and red in color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it according to what we have said earlier, but the treatment does not help
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	then you must cut into the flesh with an iron all the excess that remains under the nail
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is very helpful if the bone and nail are sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses against the flesh, causing pain and inflammation;
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	If you must place the bandage under the nail where the flesh points
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and raise it up, and cut this delicate flesh gently and lightly
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and place on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and cauterize it, for as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see that both are corrupting, then cut one off like it is said before
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it heals
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed and swollen, causing great pain, you must heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail of the little toe in an oblique manner across
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the incision does not go all the way to the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain in the wrist
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	Some people's wrists may be very fatty by nature
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is bone or nail
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some have their origin in the root of the joint or in some toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that originate in any toe nail do not move
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those that originate at the joint of the toe may move;`
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The incision for one that is fatty should be light like this:`
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it off at its root with a wide little toe nail clipper.`
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that originate from the root of the joint are difficult to treat: hold down and cut off.`
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those that originate where the nail should be on the little toe, first cut around the flesh until you reach the bone;`
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with an appropriate chisel and treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The scabs that come on both toes together are caused by birthmarks or scars from wounds or burns or similar things.`
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You must cut off this adhesion so that the toes resume their natural shapes;`
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between them moistened gauze or cloth soaked in rose oil to prevent them from sticking together;`
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or else put between them thin slices of lead until the skin is healed as it should be.`
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If scabs come on any of his toes with the palm, cut off that adhesion as necessary;`
Des vils	Warts
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Warts are large outgrowths filled with melancholic excesses that appear on various parts of the body;`
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.`
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him sometimes a purge for the colon, and then treat it with the basilica remedy.`
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of warts is done in two ways: one is to cut them off and draw out the black blood;`
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is to lift up the growth and draw out all of it.`
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision should be made in this way: first raise the leg with very hot water until the large vein is softened;`
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then squeeze the leg from above towards the thigh down to the part below the knee;`
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut off the growth at one point or two or three, with a wide incision;`[TOOL_CALLS] et tu la doie si que li sang noir en coule fors de dedens.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then raise and draw out dark blood with your hand from one end to the other until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength allows.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then apply a bandage, commanding him to bind himself with fresh meat around his black collarbone;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and restart evacuation and drainage when the veins are full, which harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevation of the leg should be done in this manner: raise the leg of the sick person, especially if there is a lot of hair
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then place him in a bath and heat the leg with warm water until it becomes red and the veins dilate;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no bath, heat it by the fire and then tie the limb at the vein of the long bone at the top of the knee or below at the ankle joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then close the skin with sinew and scrape the vein from each side until it becomes visible when touched
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it is seen red and black, and as it enters the skin it appears like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then place the knife underneath until the vein is raised from the skin, then pierce it gently with sinew
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then tie it in another location three finger widths away and scrape the skin above the vein until it becomes visible
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then raise it with the knife as you did before and pierce it with another sinew as you did at first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then make another tie or several ties if necessary, then raise it again and tie it at the ankle joint.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then draw it out and lift it up to the second tie; then pull it out tie by tie until it is completely free, then tie it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot pull it out and raise it, then insert a large needle with strong doubled thread through the vein
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and tie it and pull it out, then place a knife underneath and twist your hand back and forth until it comes out completely
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And make sure that it does not slip away, because if it slips away, you cannot pull or raise it and it will harm the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have completely treated it, place wool moistened with red vinegar and rose oil on the wound site to cleanse it.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is contracted, twisted, and coiled together, and not straight as we have said
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then you must cut it crookedly without tying it off and pull it out as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the knife used to tie veins is curved and does not cut through, so that it does not pierce the vein
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and has a large curve because if it were thin it would cut through the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
De la voinne civile	"Of the civil vein"
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is injured in legs, in warm regions where no herbs or trees grow, and on earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than the legs, which happens due to rot that comes beneath the skin
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	just as it enters the body like serpents and worms, injuring between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the sign of the onset of this vein is that there is a very great inflammation in the leg
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the location changes, and the vein begins to protrude forth like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the skin opens up, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of lead weighing between one and a half to two pounds, and tie it
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the lead hang on the leg, and each time that some of it comes out at the opening, wrap the bandage around the lead and tie it again;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, then cut off a portion of it, wrap the remaining part around, and do not cut it at its root until it has all come out;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause inflammation and rot in that place, and bad illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	Therefore, it must be treated bit by bit until it reaches its head, and nothing should remain in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And sometimes this vein, when treated, is five or ten palms long.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And once a man came to me whose vein was twenty palms long; when it was cut, it made one hole or opening, and pierced through to its depth
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out of it. Then let the matter that was inside be emptied, and apply poultices to prevent rotting for several days before treating the wound as one would a boil.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes there are many veins, especially when it opens up at the ankle or on the foot
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there are many holes from which much blood flows. Therefore treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is called in our land "cattle disease" because it often affects cattle,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	"And there is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, which travels throughout the body ascending and descending."
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	"and it is felt well as it goes from limb to limb, until it arrives at the skin where it will stay;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	"And it is a cause of putrefaction of certain humors, like those that come from worms and serpents in the belly."
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	"and its harmfulness is doubted, for when it goes through the body and climbs to the head, it comes to the eye,"
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	"sometimes it enters and destroys the eye; this happens often."
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	"When you see it being drawn out and extracted, one can only be sure that it is there when it moves:"
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	"So then you must tie the wound both above and below with a very tight strong ligature,"
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	"then cut open and draw it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it,"
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	"then cauterize with fire until it dies."
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	"And the greatest harm that it does is that it can cause blindness, as we have said;"
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	"And if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, press down firmly on the eyebrow below it, then cut open and draw it out."
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	"And one must use medicinal treatments to cleanse the body of corrupt humors causing disease,"
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	"and beware of rotten foods."
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	"Of the pain that comes from windiness"
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	"This illness is called in our land 'vaquir' and it is a pain that occurs in certain limbs,"
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	"And then the limb moves from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you."
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	"I was called to a sick woman, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small swelling in the hollow of her arm;"
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	"and shortly thereafter, she saw rise up at the shoulder like a worm,"
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more swiftly than anything else, like quicksilver as it flows from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from that place and fastened itself in the shoulder,"
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	"and then shortly after it spread throughout her body until it reached her other arm;"
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	"Then she told me that she was always turning around the body, as I saw her."
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	"I wondered greatly how she could move thus from limb to limb because I had never seen this disease behave in such a way."
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	"However, I had often heard it said that pain can move from place to another,"
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had never seen this happen in the manner that I saw it in this woman;"
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	"and I thought to myself that it was perhaps because the woman had a dry body and exposed hollows,"
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	"and thus appeared that constrained wind."
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	"but they do not appear in this manner to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and filled hollows."
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	"And when you see someone cured of this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have described,"
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	"if the skin above and below suddenly raises up and then sinks down until that constrained wind escapes from its hiding place;"
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	"and cauterize the spot. And if you do not see it with your own eyes,"
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	"then have the patient take remedies to expel wind such as fetid pills and pills of serpentine, and other similar things."
Des saiettes	"Regarding Sighs"
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	"Sighs are various according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they occur."
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	"The varieties of sighs include those that have large points, small ones, those with hairs or bristles, and those that are smooth;"
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	"and some that have two angles, some that are long, and others that have fragments or bits."
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	"And those sighs that occur in any limb do so in two ways: either by growing out from the main limb,"
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	"such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs."
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	"Now when it occurs in any part of these limbs, the signs of death that I will tell you about later will appear:"
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	"but you must be careful to remove this sigh because death comes afterward in many dispositions;"
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	"And when this ill sign does not appear and the sigh is not deep, then draw it out and treat the wound."
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	"When a sigh falls into the brain and pierces the bone, causing the optic nerve that is above the brain to spring forth,"
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	"it indicates that there is a sigh in the brain. Other signs include darkness before the eyes and dimness of sight, redness and swelling in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and mixture of understanding, vomiting of bile;"
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	"and perhaps there will be fluid from the nostrils or ears; sometimes speech and voice are lost."
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	"And suddenly moist white matter like feathers flows from the wound, and also sparks of flesh are emitted;"
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	"If these signs appear to you, then be careful about treatment, and draw out the sigh if it is not already inside."
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	"The signs that a sigh has fallen into the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty;"
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	"and sometimes the sigh moves like a bird's feather; black blood appears on the surface; coldness and cold sweat come forth; fainting occurs:"
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	"You must then be certain that death is imminent."
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	"The signs of a sigh that has entered the lung are that foam comes forth from the wound, the throat swells up, the patient changes color and sighs loudly and asks for cold air."
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	"And if the sigh enters the covering of the lung, it is near the ribs. There will be much wheezing and great pain, with loud sighs; all the shoulder limbs move."
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	"And if a sigh falls into the stomach, sometimes undigested food may emerge from the wound."
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	"And if a sigh falls into the abdomen and much wind rushes out through the intestines, there is no hope for recovery or for drawing out the sigh."
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	"And if a sigh falls into the bladder, urine flows forth and there is diarrhea; the patient feels great pain. You should know that the wound is mortal."
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	"The other limbs such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary limbs, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and similar limbs are safe according to various conditions."
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	"When a sigh is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous (as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise),"
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	"It happened to one man that a sigh fell into his eyelid at the root of the nose:"
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	"I drew it out from beneath the ear's fatty tissue on the other side and he recovered without any injury."
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	"And I drew out another sigh that fell into the fat of the eye below the eyelid:"
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	"and the sigh was inverted, and I could only grasp its tip facing the skin;"
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	"It was as large as an archer's bow without touching any bone or ear; the eye recovered and suffered no ill effects."
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	"I drew out another sigh from the throat of a Christian man, and it was Arabic in shape with ears:"
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	"I shaved his beard and worked so carefully that I drew it out, and the Christian recovered."
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	"And I drew out another sigh from a man who had fallen into his abdomen, believing he would die;"
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	"but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change."
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	"I cut into the sigh and hooked it out through its hollow end, drawing it forth without any ill effects occurring."
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	"And I saw another man in whom a sigh had fallen into his back and the wound was healed over;"
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	"and the sigh remained inside him without changing his natural disposition."
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	"He suffered no harm in any of his natural works or functions."
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	"And I saw another man into whose face a sigh had fallen and the wound had healed over;"
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	"and it remained there without causing him great pain; many others are similar."
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	"I drew out another sigh from one of the king's nobles, who had fallen into his nostril;"
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	"And it was slightly inclined towards the right side and entirely inverted;"
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	"I was called to treat him after three days had passed, finding the wound very narrow."
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	"I probed for it with great care and did not feel anything;"
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	"And he felt pain and discomfort beneath his right ear."
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	"I thought that it was due to the tip of the sigh;"
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	"I applied a plaster made from atractive digestive ointment so that the wound would not swell;"
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	"And then I saw the sigh's opening."
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	"I applied the plaster for several days, and the wound healed again, but the patient remained ill for a long time;"
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	"until he felt the sigh inside his nostril one day; he told me so."
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	"I applied a hot, corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened."
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	"and I tried [to close] it, and felt that the head of the joint was in its proper place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied this hot medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the joint became clearly visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	"And the time limit of four months was well exceeded."
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	"And then she opened the wound where I had put forceps, and tried to pull it from one side and the other, but could not remove it."
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	"So I did not stop trying and devising ways of instruments until one day I took them with well-made forceps."
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	"As will be explained at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it and heal the wound."
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	"And the physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:"
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	"I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely healthy."
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	"Now I have told you about the extraction of some teeth,"
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	"So that you will base your treatment on what I have not mentioned, because books cannot cover everything;"
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	"But the wise master compares little things and what is present and lacking,"
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	"Finds nine works and nine instruments for dealing with extraordinary things that happen in this field."
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	"I say that teeth leave the members where they are implanted only in two ways:"
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	"Either through the place where they entered or through another part."
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	"And that which jumps out through the same place where it entered is an entering tooth, and sometimes happens now."
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	"And if it does not jump out now, let it remain until the flesh has completely grown around it and the exit is closed;"
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	"And also if it is implanted in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for some days, and move it every day;"
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	"And then it will come out, and if not, surround it completely with one thin drill until the place around is widened, and then pull it."
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	"If the tooth is implanted in the bone of the head and goes as far as one of the cavities of the brain,"
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	"Do not pull it out, but let it remain until it becomes aligned after some days,"
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	"because if the tooth comes as far as this, it is the wisdom tooth."
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	"And if the tooth is implanted only in the bone and does not come to the surface,"
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	"and the patient remains for some days without any bad symptoms, then it can be pulled."
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if it is very deeply implanted and cannot come out, then apply poultices around it as I have told you; then treat the place until it is healthy."
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	"If the tooth is buried in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, search for it with all diligence;"
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	"And if you feel it, pull it out with some appropriate instrument."
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	"But if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the tooth,"
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	"then cut until the wound is large enough;"
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	"And pull the tooth if you can, and if there are roots to which it adheres,"
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	"then cut away the flesh that is stuck on both sides of the root as much as possible,"
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	"Then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out."
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	"And carefully make sure not to break the arrow while pulling it out."
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then wait until the place around is properly prepared, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	But if there is an obstruction of blood flow that opposes this, follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of incising the nerve and the vein, and devise how you can move and pull out the bone without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	Whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how it was when the bone fell in upon him
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for that is the greatest help that can be done, and if you cannot do otherwise, then place it according to what the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The bone that protrudes from elsewhere, where some part of it is visible, or where the skin appears swollen nearby:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut thereupon until forceps can grasp it, then extract it. If it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it alone for now, and then resume the extraction until it comes out completely
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if any fragment of bone remains, push it all back in
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	And if the fragment falls out and you see that you need to administer a splint, then apply one made from soft wood.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the bone enters into the wood of the splint; and then bind it firmly in place.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if the bone is impacted, apply a splint with a pointed end entering inside to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the bone is infected, it is necessary for you to cut away all the flesh around where the veins are located if possible
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as it ought to be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the bone falls into the thigh, or belly, bladder or ribs and is close by, then cut thereupon if you can
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and take care not to cut the vein and the nerve, then extract it, then sew up the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And treat it until it is healed
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat bones is similar to a bird's beak, and here is an illustration of that shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the bone fragment.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the binding splint is also like the feather of a bird
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to bind at the point of the bone fragment, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	Here is the shape of forceps for grasping and pulling:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	There are 21 common veins of which 6 are located at the head.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	That is to say:.ii. veins behind the ears called the two "ear veins";
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	"And the two arteries that appear in each temple;"
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And two veins which are in the two arms of the two eyes, which are called "aspires".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	And the vein that is within the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two sinews which are in the neck
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	And the two veins that are above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augereich".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are beneath the tongue
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins commonly known are five in each arm
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	The first is the cephalic vein, and it is on the right side, which common people call the "vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	And the second is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and common people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is on the left side
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And they call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the forearm
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and this is the one that can be seen most clearly in the elbow pit
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salvation vein is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, which has two branches
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	In the leg and in the foot there are three veins: one is under the hollow of the ankle on the left side
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "Ness" which is in the ankle of the other side
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins underneath those
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The knowledge of the veins that follow after the ears helps old catarhatics and migraine sufferers
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of the knower are such that he should raise the head of the sick person
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are with a coarse cloth, then make the sick person turn their neck towards one side
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until you see two veins appear behind the ears in two places that depend on the head
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then press with your fingers where you feel the pulse under your thumb, and squeeze gently
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand up along the entire length of the vein upstream
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut through the skin and the vein with two fingers wide apart, and let the blood flow out until you see enough
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then press and bind it, until it is healed
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	Knowledge of the two arteries that are in the two temples is helpful for old migraine sufferers
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and useful against sudden illness, customary ophthalmia and for treating tears that flow from the eyes
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And these are the qualities of the knower:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	"And it is necessary for the patient to stretch their neck so that the two veins appear clearly;"
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	"And feel the pulse under your two fingers, and then squeeze inwards;"
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift your little finger up high onto the vein above, and insert the lancet underneath.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and raise the vein up, and cut it, just like you did with the other two veins, and let blood flow according to your needs
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then release the patient, and press your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Then tie it tightly and leave it until it is healed. We have spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the frontal vein is just as valuable as the cephalic one for treating old facial diseases, migraines, and redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	Its quality is that the patient twists their neck until the vein appears
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fossor", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press firmly with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow out according to the desired quantity;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then untie the patient's neck, and tie the vein tightly until it is healed. Often this operation is done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too narrow, and tie it diagonally, because the bone is close by, and sometimes the flame breaks when it is too thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and with dandruff, redness, and inflammation of the eye, and with facial diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	Its quality is that the patient twists their neck in any direction, just like before
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then heal it, and make the healing diagonal, a little long and a little wide because there is no flesh in that area.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is too thin, it may break. Then apply pressure to stop the bleeding, until you have enough blood. Then tie cotton on top and tie it tightly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The healing of the vein in the nose is useful for ague, sudden madness, and facial diseases,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	As migraine pain and redness come to the face, especially when it's chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	The symptom of the illness is that the patient strains their neck first, then strains their nose towards your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	"And take a long, subtle flame, and insert it between the two nostrils."
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	"because the passage does not open well, and breathing will now begin to return;"
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	"And do not cut too deep, and let blood according to your need, then bind it with a bandage for one night, as it is quickly restored."
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	"This is the form of the fever:"
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	"The juice of two onions aids in the treatment of ulcers, and the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and empetigine, and corrosion, and herpes, and eruptions;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	"And the quality of this juice is that the patient will stretch his neck beneath both his arms, as we have said;"
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	"and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient lying on one seat,"
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	"then wash the vein with warm water a little bit, then let blood temperately, as much as is necessary;"
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	"then do the same to the other vein, then untie the bandage, and press both veins moderately,"
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	"so that the patient is not strangled; and leave him until morning, so that the wound is healed."
De la sainie des leivres	"On the juice of oats"
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	"The juice of the veins of the lips above aids in coldness in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of the lips, and nose and around."
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	"And the quality of this juice is to make the patient sit in front of you, and press his neck as I have said;"
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	"then turn the lip, and look at both veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left,"
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	"And know them by these signs: they are black, and there are small black veins around them:"
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	"then cut both of them, but if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt,"
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	"then cut the largest one on each side, and do exactly the same for both veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner."
De la sainie desoz la lengue	"On the juice beneath the tongue"
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	"The juice of the veins beneath the tongue aids after the cephalic juice, and is for the stretching of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth."
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	"And the quality of this juice is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, lifts his tongue and looks beneath on each side for a black vein:"
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	"then cut both of them, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries."
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	"The veins of the arm which are commonly used are let according to two manners:"
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	"either by piercing with one blow of a broad mirror or a fine olive-shaped blade like a cutting edge, and is called ‘anesil’;"
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	"And they are broad and fine according to the width and stretching of the veins."
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	"The shape of the mirror blow is very well known, and is wide as you see:"
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	"And it is necessary to use it to open the veins of the head that are smooth and full of visible thick blood, which contain thick and turbid blood;"
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	"and this is the shape of the olive blow:"
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	"And it is more pointed and fine, and is for letting the veins that have thin, lemon-colored blood."
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	"The juice of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, aids diseases that are beneath the throat, neck, breast, and abdomen;"
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	"And it is necessary for the surgeon to let it freely and beware of the artery that is beneath."
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	"And if he cuts the artery and blood begins to flow profusely, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said;"
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	"and the blow should not be piercing, but cutting like an ‘anesil’."
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	"And if the basilica does not appear manifestly, then it is necessary to draw it out and change to another [vein]."
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	"or you want any part of it, or you let in its place the vein on the arm: it appears manifestly;"
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	"And cut it with the ‘anesil’ blow, as we have said."
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	"And if you want to know the place of letting, then it is necessary first to draw out the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse;"
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	"then mark the place with ink and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the ‘anesil’ blow;"
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	"and be careful not to strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery. Avoid it therefore."
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	"And if you see something protruding upwards like a child’s urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery:"
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	"then hurry and press your finger down firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens;"
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	"if not, tie the arm and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; he should be quiet and not move until he is healed."
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	"And if the bleeding does not stop and he faints, and there is no doctor present, then cut the artery if it appears, for its head contracts; and stop the bleeding."
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	"And take a piece of fig bark, split it open, and take one half and tie it tightly around until the next day;"
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	"If the bleeding stops, that is good. If not, then treat it with powders that stop blood, as we have said;"
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	"and the stopping of bleeding is not harmful in many positions for the small place of the wound and the power of the ligature of the arm."
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	"The letting of the vein in the middle helps to draw off blood from the head above and from the body below,"
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	"because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic veins, as we have said;"
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	"And it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is beneath, and not to go too deep, lest he find the nerve;"
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	"and it swells and the sick person is harmed, and perhaps he cannot heal."
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	"And this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in some men because of its thinness, then you should let it with the ‘anesil’ instrument; and avoid the nerve to your power."
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	"And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise;"
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	"The letting of the cephalic vein helps to draw off blood from the head and aids eyestrain;"
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	"And it is necessary to let with a piercing blow using the olive-shaped or mirror blow, for this vein is the safest of all veins because there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it."
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	"Nevertheless, one should seek out the easiest place and do no harm if one misses on the first try; then one begins again;"
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	"And sometimes the place swells in some men when one misses on the first try, but it does no harm."
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	"The quality of letting depends on your judgment."
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	"The first thing you should know about letting blood is that letting is not prescribed except for preserving health;"
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	"and to avoid future illnesses;"
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	"And letting should be done in one of the three veins found on the arm: namely, the cephalic, basilic, and median cubital veins;"
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	"And one should let blood at the beginning of Lent, in autumn and winter after meals, when the sign of repletion appears;"
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	"And one should let blood on the first or third day, after two or three hours from noon."
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The sick person who is given this medicine has no fixed time for taking it, but whenever there is need by day or night, in all hours and at all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	nor should this medicine be given to children under 14 years old, nor to women who are pregnant until after their seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the elderly over 60 years of age receive this medicine.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wishes to take this medicine in any way, it is necessary that they first cleanse their bowels with a light enema
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the harmful impurities from the bowels into the main limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should this medicine be taken by those who are too fond of meat or those who are drunkards, until they abstain from such habits, nor by those with dropsy;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and beware of taking this medicine after a bout of colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive menstrual flow in women, hard labor, wakefulness, fasting, or any weakness throughout the body caused by external injury or internal illness.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtly dissolve the humors if the skin is thick, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power to do so;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, in order to subtly refine the blood
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and take this medicine on an empty stomach around the third hour of the day, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	And guard yourself that day from work, overeating, and lustful activities, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be at ease and joyous, and let the one administering the medicine be taller than the recipient, and rub the arms three or four times with a friction cloth.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then remove the lien around the middle, for if it is too tight or loose, the blood will not flow properly;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the place gently with the hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then let the one administering the medicine moisten their finger with a little old oil, and then place their left thumb on that vein below the place where they wish to administer the medicine
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein is neither too full nor empty when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee like strings when struck, and some that are filled with windiness
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one places the finger on top, it retreats with the finger, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of these;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so that the one administering the medicine must be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, that is good. But if not, then begin again a little below or above that place immediately, if the place is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the place is swollen and the patient is afraid, let it be left alone for one or two days without binding the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps an ulcer will appear there. Do not enter into a bath, and then resume administering the medicine if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	And if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that enough blood is issuing forth as you wish, then strike with the whole finger directly into that same opening.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And open it a little quickly before the place becomes swollen, for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place becoming swollen, do not resume administering the medicine, and apply a little oil mixed with lime, for it lightens the body of blood and is very beneficial in this place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the mixture of oil each time you administer medicine to the veins, in order to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this same mixture also helps against trial and bowels, when it is applied to the place, for it makes the blood flow more subtly and spreads it out if it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there appears a large ulcer there, which happens frequently, especially when the vein is not opened but only touched that one time and the opening of the vein is small
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	then hurry and apply a sponge moistened in hot water mixed with salt to the place, and let it remain for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And you must do this after the blood has issued forth from the vein, and if there remains on the place some blackness or greenness for a few days afterward, it will not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you wish to apply something else, then use a little aloë or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, masterwort, or the like.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an ulcer and appearance appear during the administering of basilica: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft under the pressure of your hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to apply anything that we have spoken of here, for perhaps some blood will flow from the artery; but make one plaster dry to harden the place, and then cleanse it with another cleansing until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw off the blood according to each person's constitution and the color of their blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red. And if it flows thickly, let it flow until it becomes more subtly flowing. And if it is too hot, let it cool before striking again.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for one who is full and fat and needs bloodletting, it is necessary to make a larger wound and use a wide finger
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for one who is weak, do the opposite: make the wound small and administer often, and it should be administered by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this manner of bloodletting is safe from excessive loss of blood and injury to the nerves, and it is more beneficial than bloodletting by length or breadth.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for one whose body fails during bloodletting, it is necessary to give him bread moistened with juice of pomegranates; if he is overheated, draw off his blood three or four times
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of cold complexion, let him eat before bloodletting bread moistened in syrup of musk or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he faints during bloodletting after losing much blood, it is necessary for him to inhale broth of meat and fragrant syrup
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have spoken of in the chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to evacuate one arm and have bloodletting done again afterward, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he be bled a little at a time according to his continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wishes to evacuate one arm after the first bloodletting and has a strong body should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to have bloodletting done on another part of the body should be bled on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood in the body that has already become heated and causes fever. Therefore, it is necessary to draw off a large quantity of blood and widen the wound as much as possible until it flows evenly.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	And since you observe all conditions for bloodletting and place your hand on the pulse when bleeding begins, ensure that the mouth does not come in place of the wound.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	"And this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent; "
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	"And it's not enough to simply untie the arm and make blood flow out a second time when the hole is closed by pressing hard upon it,"
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	"nor if it is curved, should he quickly extend his arm, for this would be harmful."
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	"But let him remain until it bleeds again the second time; or else poke with the tip of the flame until the blood that is frozen at the mouth of the wound flows out,"
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	"And pour on some watery salted water, then press lightly upon it."
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	"But if the vein is swollen, do not let go nor squeeze too hard until the inflammation has subsided."
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	"And if it becomes necessary to draw blood a second time, do so either in the same vein or in another one, or even in the other arm."
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	"The vein in the arm is opened in place of the vein in the head because it is more accessible."
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	"And the method for bleeding is that the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the veins are red;"
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	"then tie it moderately so that the vein appears well; then make the cut now across, not too wide nor too long;"
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	"and make the hole wide; bleed as close to the joint of the hand as possible. If blood cannot flow out, immerse the hand in hot water and let it bleed into the water until enough blood has flowed."
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	"And if this is done in summer, do not immerse the hand in hot water, for it is better to do so in winter than in summer."
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	"And bleeding from this vein is safer than from any other veins because there are no arteries or nerves present."
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	"The bleeding of the vein at the base of the thumb is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it should be done:"
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	"Press the hand gently and immerse it in hot water until the vein swells enough to be visible;"
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	"And make the cut across; if you cut too deep, it will not matter."
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	"But do not cut too deeply because nerves lie beneath all skin and flesh;"
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	"Then immerse the hand in hot water again if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot flow out."
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	"And when you have drawn enough blood, apply oil and a little salt to quickly cauterize the wound, and do this for each cut."
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	"The bleeding of the vein in the left hand is beneficial for those suffering from mumps, and it should be done in the same way as I have described for the right hand."
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	"The bleeding of the vein at the elbow is beneficial for all diseases that affect the lower body;"
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	"such as those affecting the buttocks, retention of urine, and diseases of the loins, thighs, and old legs, and similar conditions."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	"The qualities of this bleeding are that the patient should immerse their foot in hot water and rub the vein until it swells;"
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	"then tie above the ankle; the vein is at the ankle, and many nerves run below the foot;"
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	"So cut either where the largest vein or nerve appears, or at the ankle."
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	"And if you bleed on the foot, beware of the nerves that lie beneath. Make the cut across, like cutting a slice; and let the blood flow freely."
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	"And if blood cannot flow out, immerse the foot in water again and allow the vein to empty completely."
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	"If the first cut does not bleed well, make a second one higher up because the spot is scarred;"
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	"do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the elbow of the other arm."
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	"The location of the sciatic vein is on the outside ankle, and bleeding it is beneficial for lower back pain when caused by hot blood."
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	"The qualities of this bleeding are that the patient should sit in a bath and press four fingers above the ankle while twisting;"
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	"otherwise the vein will not open. But if it does open, bleed as much as you can, and make the cut across."
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	"And it is important that you cut deeply because the spot is hard, and many people have this vein blocked."
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	"But if you cannot find it, bleed any vein that appears on the back of the foot near the little toe, but beware of nerves;"
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	"And let as much blood flow out as you can see, then untie the bandage, apply cotton and press firmly; now it is bled."
Des sainies de ventouse	"Regarding bleeding with leeches:"
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	"Leeches are made from horn, glass, or earthenware and can be used in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking."
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	"And this leeching that does not involve pricking can be done in two ways: either with fire, or without fire;"
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	"and bleeding by pricking and drawing blood is performed at fourteen locations on the body."
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	"The first location is entirely on the head, and the second is within the neck;"
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	"and two more on each side of the neck, plus one beneath the chin;"
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	"And bleeding at the shoulders, and bleeding above the hips;"
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	"and bleeding on each arm and bleeding on each leg."
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	"And bleeding at the ankles. And note that leeching does not draw much blood except for small veins scattered throughout the flesh."
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	"Therefore it does not weaken anyone, unlike bleeding from veins;"
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	"And it should not be administered in any case where the whole body is filled with excess matter."
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	"But if it is necessary to leech due to illness or custom, we will administer them every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and also in between during each season."
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	"For there are some people who, when they need to be leeched, have heavy heads;"
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	"And others find that they experience fullness and redness in their face, head, neck, and darkness before the eyes;"
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	"And some people find a drop of blood in their mouth, and they have an enlarged tongue that bleeds easily."
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	"Some people dream of seeing blood and being wounded or bitten, etc."
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	"And when we see these signs, especially during the month, we will order them to be leeched three hours after noon."
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	"The bleeding of the temple helps with headaches ... that come to them, but it should not be done after evacuating the entire body."
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	"And this leeching is in place of bleeding from the cephalic vein;"
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	"But those who have a cold temperament or are phlegmatic should not use it, as it causes them great harm."
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	"Therefore elderly people and those with cold-headed conditions should not use it."
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	"And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful. Therefore, the leech should be placed a little lower to avoid forgetfulness."
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	"Leeaching on the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and basilic veins. Therefore it is useful for those with narrow chests."
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	"And it helps with breaking wind from the stomach, coughing, and excess."
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	"However, it should not be placed too firmly, as if it sticks too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or harm to the stomach or heart."
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	"Windings around two ribs of the neck are helpful for headaches, and eye pain, migraine, strangulation, and toothache root pain."
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	"And it is located at the entrance to the basilica; and you must order the surgeon that he press his hand on setting, that he not cut the artery, nor let blood flow."
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	"Windings under the chin are good for mouth disease, gum decay, and similar mouth diseases; and they are located at the entrance of two lips."
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	"The shoulder windings are good for diseases that come from heat and swelling."
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	"Windings of the ribs are as beneficial as three veins of the arm."
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it attracts blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the senior not to cut too deeply, for the place is bare of flesh, and lies under nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the buttock is useful for hemorrhoids and lower diseases, and the cupping glass must be large and made of bronze, so that it can draw well; and sometimes if it is too fine, it may break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs draw openly because they attract blood from all over the body and are useful for old pains in the kidneys, sciatica, bladder, and joints; they replace two sophenes and two ankles, but they also weaken the body after prolonged use and cause swelling in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is as follows: first apply it empty, and suck moderately, then place it quickly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the skin turn red and swollen with blood visible on the surface. Then remove it and replace the cups, taking care to observe the condition of the body because some people have thin flesh and tender pores, so you should strike only once, make the wounds wide but not too deep, and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time. And when we want to draw only a little blood at a time, one stroke will suffice.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to draw a lot of blood, we should strike repeatedly. And if the blood is thick, we should strike deeply, and the endpoint is when the heart pierces suddenly
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And for those who have thick skin and hard flesh with tight pores, you should oil the places of the cupping glasses with aperitive and dissolventive oil
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in summer, with violet oil or sweet almond oil or pumpkin seed oil
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in winter, with mustard oil or lily oil or chamomile oil or something similar
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excessiveness is thick and cold, use almond oil or balm oil or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And for those who have tender flesh with large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil there
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but after the cupping treatment, they should be washed with rose water or cold water or mulberry water or pumpkin water or porcellain water, or something similar
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should rise using this method: with myrtle water or sumac water and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have a lot of excessiveness should rise with old wine or sour water or decoction of anise or chamomile or similar things
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And one should not apply cupping glasses before or during the bath, but afterwards, one hour or two hours later; and do not sleep after the cupping treatment.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary that he/she washes himself/herself when they are about to undergo cupping treatment and when they have finished being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are cupping themselves if they are choleric in temperament and if their blood is too hot and inflamed
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	They should take cold things such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce with vinegar, and similar things
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And eat young kids, castrated ram meat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with cold complexion should take honey syrup and medium fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat little meat of young kids and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day when they will undergo cupping treatment, they should drink more than they eat
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	Some people should be given treacle or musk sometimes before or after cupping to strengthen the main organs
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And let the blood be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The cupping glasses that are placed without striking are those placed on the liver, spleen, abdomen, face, back, and buttocks. These areas do not tolerate being struck.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	And it is only done for attracting blood from one member to another.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	For example, we place cupping glasses on the breasts when nursing to remove viscosity from that member. Similarly, we place cupping glasses on the abdomen and face to reduce the size of those members
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And it removes pain when there is congestion or stone, by its attractive virtue it may dissolve the congestion or remove the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And thus it does when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	These cupping glasses are administered empty for suction only. Sometimes they are used together with fire, and sometimes they are filled with tepid water
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	like in diseases of the pleura, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have on its side around the middle one small hole like that of a needle
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	"And if made of brass, soften it first so it does not scorch the patient when applied to the limb;"
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	"And have in the middle a transverse rod of brass or iron, to place an oil lamp upon,"
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	"and they should be large or small depending on the diseases and age of those who take them;"
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the cupping glasses for children are different from those for adults, and those for thin people are different from those for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	"One should thus place this cupping glass on the limb:"
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take a candle wick or one linen thread, and insert it through the hole in the cupping glass.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	"So that the brightness is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient."
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	"Then place it on the limb and hold both thumbs over the hole we mentioned so that when one wants to do so, steam can be released, and then remove the cupping glass."
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	"And apply the ointment as before, and repeat it often if necessary."
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	"In the case of the cupping glass used for the disease of pleurisy in an acute state, it has neither spout nor hole, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb alone."
et c’est li forme:	"And this is its shape:"
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	"Suction cups are used only in limbs where it is not possible to apply cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similarly the ears."
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	"And in areas of bare skin, such as the back or neck, and other similar places;"
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	"The quality of its use is that when one finds suction cups which are in fresh water that is clear and without impurities, then those should be taken."
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	"And places them in fresh water for as long as they become familiar with it and have nothing inside them;"
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	"Then clean the veins and cupping glasses, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place the suction cups on it."
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	"And when they are full and suck, if this is a place where one can apply cupping glasses, then apply them for that helps very much afterwards."
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	"If not, then lift the limb gently and then rinse it with water, well done, and then squeeze it."
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	"And if the limb is too dry after the body of the suction cups, then moisten one cloth of linen in cold water and place it so that the cups are stretched."
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	"And if the cups are multiplied, then apply powdered vitriol or chalk, etc., until they become tightened;"
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	"Or you can put on the limb half of peeled fava beans and leave them there until they stick to the limb, it will now be tightened;"
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	"And if more are needed, then take other suction cups."
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	"And if the suction cups do not want to adhere, then rub the limb with fresh blood or prick it with a needle until the cup adheres."
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	"Then place them on and as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere;"
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	"And when you see that they are full, then apply a little powder of ground aloe and salt or ashes, and they will now suck."
Ci comence li livre des brisures	"Here begins the book of fractures"
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	"This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the treatment of fractures and dislocations."
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	"Know, dear son, that foolish physicians neglect this chapter, as they have never seen any of the ancient books nor read a letter from them;"
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	"And because of this reason, knowledge of this subject is rare in our land, for I found no good one among them."
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	"And I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated this subject with experience and by custom throughout my life;"
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	"And I have already described for you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the tools that are used, just as I did in these two preceding chapters."
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	"It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the contents of the words and chapters where wise men place their understanding and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others."
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	"I say that when fracture, dislocation, torsion or concussion occurs in anyone, it is necessary for you to hurry and clean the injured on both sides, if anything is not whole, such as weakness of body, childbirth, or old age;"
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	"Or if the time is not very hot or too cold, and avoid cold foods, such as cold drinks, chicken meat and rabbit meat, do not drink wine nor eat fatty meats, and do not eat too much food that fills the veins with blood, until you doubt the formation of a hot aposteme, nor an expansion of matter in the limb; then bring the sick back to their usual diet."
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	"And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods that cause good growth and are moistening, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testicles, pears, apples, cow's milk, eggs, fresh fish, and similar things."
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	"For with this nourishment muscles grow back more quickly and the fracture heals faster;"
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	"And know that the bones of old and decrepit people, nor those that are too tender like the bones of small children, cannot be well restored or united according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs;"
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	"But rather use a large splint to support the broken bone and join the limb together until it regains its former strength; do not remove any part of its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish them with fatty foods, as we have said."
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	"And know that fractures are diverse in many ways."
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	"For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures."
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	"There are fractures that occur suddenly, like falling from a horse, and others that occur gradually, like the splitting of a feather for writing."
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	"And there are fractures with wounds, and fractures with only a small crack."
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	"And each kind has its own method and proper tool for restoration, according to what the fracture comes into its place;"
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	"and a fracture of bone is known by the fact that the place is twisted and clearly visible through defect, and it sounds when pressed with the hand;"
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	"and when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, nor does the sick person feel much pain, then there is no fracture."
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	"But he may well have twisting, or cracking, or a small fracture."
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	"So do not move him by hand, but apply the medicines that come later and then gently immobilize him."
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	"And know that fractures that occur suddenly and separate the two parts are to be aligned evenly until hot inflammation comes;"
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	"and if hot inflammation comes, let it rest for some days until the inflammation is appeased;"
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	"then align it as evenly and gently as possible, and know that its restoration is easier than that of one with fragments; then immobilize it as necessary."
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	"And if the bone has broken fragments, then extend it on both sides if it is an arm or leg, or use your hand if it is a small limb, or use two cords or one cord and your hand;"
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	"and place the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts of the limb are aligned, then carefully place the fragments in their proper places without causing injury or pain to the sick person;"
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	"And join the two ends of the bones according to their best forms."
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	"And feel it well with your hand if it seems not to be properly set: then raise it carefully and do not immobilize it too much nor press upon it as those do who cause hot inflammation and contracture in the limb through their improper handling, as we have often said."
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	"And when the limb is set, then instruct the patient well not to move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner;"
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	"And ensure that the limb is secured so that the patient feels no pain."
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	"For if he feels any pain, then it is not set properly, and it must be put in such a position that he feels no pain;"
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	"And make sure it is reset correctly so that there are no twists when it is restored."
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	"The condition of the fractured limb depends on what I have told you."
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	"Know that fractured limbs are diverse in size, length and shape."
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	"But there are small limbs, such as arms and hands and similar ones; these should be wrapped with soft and fine linen cloths;"
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	"And those which are thick, such as thighs and legs; these should be wrapped with a wide and firm bandage, for the wide bandage encircles the entire large limb and squeezes it evenly on all sides so that there is no gap."
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	"Then tie it around with light bandages, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on all of the bandage. Then go up above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture can move a little away from the fracture."
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	"And loosen the bandage a little by little until you grasp most of the healthy part, then take another bandage and wrap it around again over the fractured area;"
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	"Then return to the part below the fracture and tighten it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first binding above;"
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	"Then place linen bandages or cloths between the bindings so that it is all even, then tie everything together with one strip, and then put on well-made splints if there is no inflammation or swelling."
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	"And if there is inflammation or heat, then put on something that cools and reduces heat and swelling, and leave it on for a few days;"
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	"Then tie around your splints, and they should be half the width of a strong cane or of oak wood used for stakes, or of date palm ribs, and they should look like this:"
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	"But the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and wider than the others;"
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	"And it should also be as long as necessary for the limb's size or length;"
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	"Then tie around the splints just as you did in the first binding, then tie a bandage on top of them smoothly, as in the first binding over the fracture;"
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	"Then pull it tighter and loosen it again; and the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;"
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	"For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their bindings with twisted flax cords, that is a great error. For the binding cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be more than two fingers' width between each splint."
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	"And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the bandaging on healthy areas, place linen bandages or wool wadding underneath them so that it does not bruise."
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	"When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the skin is broken, I will speak about its treatment later on."
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	"And know that one should not bind all broken limbs with splints on the first day."
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	"For when a limb is large, one should not put splints on it until after five or six days, or more, depending on the likelihood of heat and inflammation occurring;"
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	"And here is the way that ancient poultices were made to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take flour from the walls of the mill and mix it with many eggs. Use this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, as needed. This is the common method for applying a poultice to restore fractures in various conditions, especially in women and young children, because it is not too hot nor too cold."
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	"Another method for making a poultice that restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: Take of bdellium and ladanum and wild marjoram and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each 10 drams; aloes wood, 5 drams; aloeroot, 7 drams; grind them into a powder and mix it with many eggs. If the person's complexion is hot, use this poultice, for it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it is beneficial to many people."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	"Another method for making a poultice that is beneficial for twists: Take of myrrh and vismalva, each 10 drams; myrrh and aloes wood, each 7 drams; acacia gum, 6 drams; balsam of Armenia, 10 drams; grind them well and mix with water or many eggs, and apply it."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	"Another method for making a poultice for joints and dislocated bones that soothes pain and reduces inflammation and fracture: Take new linen and moisten it in warm water mixed with hot oil, then apply it to the area. This poultice does not restore, but it is good for soothing heat and inflammation, and it removes pain properly."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	"Another method for making a poultice that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and dock leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	"Another method for making a poultice to restore broken bones and to soften the remaining inflammation: Take of violet root, camomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour, each one part; grind them together and mix with wine. If the limb is hot, mix it with coriander water or water, and apply it."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	"Another method for making a stronger poultice when hard inflammation comes to the restoration of a limb: Take violet root, flax seed, balm, meadow saffron, and sagewort, each one part; grind them together and mix with salt water or fresh water or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest."
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	"Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more. He says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard."
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	"And it seems to Galen that one should put dry and slightly warm things on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloe, frankincense, and similar substances, as we have said."
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	"Another method for making a poultice that is beneficial for wounds and pain: Take myrrh and the cut hair of men or feathers of birds, and violet leaves, each an equal part; grind them together and make a poultice with it."
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	"And then remove it after a little while, and make sure that the patient does not feel any pain or movement of the bone from its place; do not remove it for many days."
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	"And if pain or itching comes to the place, without rest or swelling, then hurry up and remove it, and take away the poultice immediately; and take a light cloth and wet sea sponge, dip it in water, and wipe the place until the itching stops and the pain is appeased."
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then allow the limb to rest for an hour, then place dry linen moistened in water or rose oil on it, and tie it with a bandage until you are sure of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and let the pain be relieved, then resume the bandage gently, and a little plaster, and do not pull it too hard as before; and continue until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen are all gone, and you need plaster and bandages again, then resume it, just as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if the limb receives none of what we have said, do not untie it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals, and the alignment of the flesh approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then tighten the bandage more than before, and let the flesh grow together, as I have said previously; and if you see that the place dries out too much, know that no nourishment can come there.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then apply warm water compresses all the time you untie it, and do this every third day, and slacken the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Thus nourishment comes to the limb by this procedure, and it quickly remedies what foolish doctors do wrongly, namely setting the limb incorrectly: this is evil, and such procedures are poor, and I see nothing else but leaving it alone and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various types of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many different kinds of fractures, with diverse appearances, and their causes are distinct:
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Because it has fractures caused by blows from a sword, and the collarbone removes all the bone down to the socket which is beneath the bone, just like an axe on wood; and therefore this type of fracture is called "hachure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures is large or small
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion that embeds, splits, or crushes from a fall onto stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that approaches the bone tissue beneath the bone or is above it, and this wound can be large or small
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a fracture that penetrates into the bone as thin as a hair, and this split is small, and therefore this type of fracture is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is caused by striking with stone or falling or something similar, and pushes a fragment of bone downwards, like a hammer hitting a pot, so that fragments enter inside
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often in those who have moist bones in their head, such as the heads of children
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And all these types of fractures have small fragments that are disconnected like stars; and I will speak about this in its proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all types of fractures by the displacement on them, by careful inspection, and by the corrupted flesh that is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary fracture is recognized because when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating a fracture, pay attention to any accidents of illness, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever with chills, inflammation of the eyes, etc., in many conditions, he cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accident and hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded person first comes to you, especially in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to split the fractured part in this way: take the head of the wounded person and uncover the bone in all possible ways and gently on the surface of the wound
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if blood flows or a hot abscess appears when the bone is uncovered, help him with what is necessary, and fill the place with gauze moistened in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is calmed and you are assured that there will be no bleeding; then begin to remove the bone around it in one of two ways:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	"And then I add another cut, greater than the first one."
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	"The second method is that you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed and made of iron. And work lightly so that you do not injure the head."
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	"And if the bone is prominent and hard, then you must pierce around it before you administer cuts with trepanation, not so deep that they penetrate the soft bone, and each one should have a margin or circle on top to prevent the point from passing through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one fits in its place on the blade of the bone, so that you have trepanations for all testicles. And this is the form of the three kinds of trepanation:"
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	"The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one trepanation on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone has been pierced; then remove the trepanation a little further away, and do this all around, then cut with scissors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this as subtly and lightly as possible, so that you can remove the bone by hand or with any of the tools you have such as tweezers; and make sure that you do not touch the cerebellum or the medulla oblongata."
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	"And when you have pierced and removed the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the remaining prominence of the bone with another tool resembling scissors, but it must be thinner and more delicate than other scissors;"
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	"and if there is anything left of the small bones or any scales, then remove them lightly with one of your tools; then dress the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said."
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	"And the other way of operating is that which Galen recommends, which is safer; and he praises it very much, these are his words:"
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	"It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone where the fracture appears more openly, so that when you have exposed this part, then place beneath the head of this lenticular knife, of which here is the form:"
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	"And do not cut on one side, but the blade is pointed on both sides so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer, so that you cut the bone all around lightly, and be careful of the dura mater beneath."
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	"If it is adherent to the bone, then remove it gently, for it can be removed well without harm and without fear."
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the dura mater, and the bone is only cut on top with small pieces, then it is necessary to remove this prominence and remove the scales with a fine razor that you should have in various quantities, so as to accommodate each place according to the operation and shape of the fracture."
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	"So remove first with large razors, and then with more delicate ones, and do not stop doing this until it is completely done."
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	"In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary to adapt your action according to its direction; this is something that cannot be responded to by anyone who has dedicated their study to this art."
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	"And if the spinal cord is exposed, then you must take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;"
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	"then take another cloth doubled in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can, so that you do not compress the spinal cord, then apply another linen bandage above, and do not tie it too tightly but only enough to keep it in place."
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	"and leave it like this for one or two days until the inflammation has subsided, then untie it and apply medicines such as lily roots, fine wheat flour, incense powder, and aristologus, and similar things; make a powder of these things and place it on the wound, and apply Mondelfian medicines without biting them."
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	"And make sure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment or allow blood to collect there, for when blood collects on the dura mater of the brain, it corrupts and causes great harm to the patient; for when something irritating is placed on the spinal cord, it becomes necrotic above."
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	"Therefore be careful, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt."
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	"And if blackness appears outside due to the medicine that was applied there, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue together on a cloth, and place it on the spinal cord;"
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"then apply the treatment according to the methods of treatments that are necessary until he is healed."
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	"Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or only one is broken by itself, for these are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is struck or twisted, then it heals."
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	"And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or a probe into the nostril and place the break evenly on your index finger inside, and press from behind with your thumb until the nose regains its natural shape;"
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	"and do this gently, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain due to your operation."
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	"And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must insert a small rod with a rounded end into it."
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	"And if the break is in two places, then do likewise, and try to restore it on the first day if possible;"
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	"But if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation has subsided, insert into the head of the nose a bandage made of linen cloths, if the break is in one part."
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	"Or insert another one on the other side if there is a break there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill up the nostrils."
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	"And some restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in butter and changed every day. I do not think this is good, but rather they should be soaked in a mixture of egg yolk and millet flour; then leave the bandage until the bone has hardened and the cartilage has stiffened."
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	"And sometimes feathers from a goose are inserted instead of bandages into the nostrils, with one soft cloth wrapped around them, and if the break is held in place, then let the patient blow gently through them; do what you see fit."
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	"And if inflammation appears in the nose while you are working on it, then insert there wax or cotton soaked in rose oil or a little bit of diacynthion."
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	"And if inflammation does not appear in the nose, then apply a plaster from behind made of sesame flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light gauze over it and do not bind the nose;"
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture is small and broken into many pieces, remove it with appropriate instruments, then stitch the crack and heal it with suitable remedies, such as plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside yet, then treat it with compresses, and put on plaster splints until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only on one side, not completely broken into two pieces, it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, place your left index finger in the patient's mouth and feel for it; if it is on the left jawbone, place your right index finger inside your mouth and gently press on the fracture from outside with your other hand until it aligns.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced by two fingers' width, you must apply traction forcefully until it is aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is displacement or fracture of teeth, thread them with gold, silver or silk thread. Then apply cerote on the broken jawbone and place a double cloth over it. Next, put on a well-made bandage or a piece of leather cut to size according to the length and width of the jawbone, and tie it securely behind the head. Tell the patient to rest and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the position changes, untie it on the third day and then reapply what was loosened. Then apply a plaster made from flour mixed with albumen or sesame flour, after removing the cerote. Next, place a light linen over the plaster. If the plaster dries and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals; many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if swelling appears, apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been lost. If so, use appropriate instruments to remove it carefully.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, widen it with a cautery according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these fragments, and none remain, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place one of the bandages suitable for this, to encourage flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	From the scalpel
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The scalpel has broken several times near the shoulder blade, and there are three types of breaks: either it is broken off in two places without any fragments, which is easiest to reset; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	The operation is as follows when there is no wound: you will need two assistants so that one can hold the scalpel which has been broken while the other extends the neck towards the part; then align the break between your hands so that the shape is correct and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round cloth or linen sponge under the patient's shoulder according to your needs; then lift the scalpel and grasp the sponge with your hand so that you can align the break correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the blade of the scalpel forward because it has gone in deep, then have the patient lie on their side with a pillow under their shoulder and place a small cushion underneath. Then have your assistant press down on the shoulder so that the bone of the blade is lifted up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then align the break with your hands and if it is displaced, you must cut upwards. Gently remove any fragments and if the bone cannot be realigned due to any obstruction, use one of the cutting instruments you have to remove the obstacle underneath the scalpel while protecting the tissues.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	It should resemble a spoon and not be sharp. It should also be wide enough according to the size of the bone and the power of the surgery, with two ends: one wide and one narrow like the edges of the wound you made when you exposed the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And once you are sure that there is sufficient granulation tissue present, close the wound. If the edges of the wound are small or in doubt, pack it with gauze and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if granulation tissue is not present, soak a piece of gauze in rose oil mixed with honey and vinegar, and apply it to the wound.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The treatment of an uninjured bone fracture is to apply a plaster made from the powder of millstone and egg albumen over the bone, then apply light dressings on top. If necessary, place a pillow under the limb.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide bandage (about one palm wide), place a doubled gauze pad on top of the dressings and plaster, then take a soft strip (about three fingers wide) and wrap it around the bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	Then place the strip across the fracture and twist the bandage up over the neck and under both healthy and injured limbs. Secure each part separately so that the binding holds the fracture securely in place without moving on the broken bone. Check this daily and when the bindings become loose, tighten them as needed.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And have the patient lie on their back and place a small pillow under the injured shoulder while they sleep to elevate it. Lighten the load on the broken bone by aligning the shoulder or tying the arm to the chest, but do not untie it unless necessary for up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then restart the plastering if necessary, secure it and leave it on until the bone is healed, which usually takes 28 days but can take less time for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Treatment of shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder blade breaks without displacing the shoulder joint, and cannot be felt except by touch. In such cases, apply the plaster according to the shape of the fracture, and mold it according to its natural shape as much as possible. Then sprinkle powdered millstone with egg albumen on the skin, followed by light dressings, a doubled gauze pad and then a wide and soft strip slightly larger than the shoulder blade. If any sharp edges are felt underneath the strip, fill them in with linseed poultices so that the strip lies evenly. Then secure it firmly with a large bandage to prevent the strip from moving. Check the binding daily and tighten it whenever it loosens. Make sure the patient lies on their side during healing. The shoulder blade usually heals within 20-25 days, but once this period is reached, do not remove the bindings too early as the bone does not heal quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of bone sticks out and is not beneath the heart, cut it off and apply the treatment for fracture of the collarbone as mentioned earlier to encourage granulation tissue formation.
de la brisure dou pis	Treatment of elbow fracture
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The elbow is sometimes fractured in the middle, but this happens rarely. However, it often fractures on the outside. When the elbow is fractured in the middle, it drops downwards and causes severe pain, loss of movement, trembling, and sometimes vomiting of blood. The sharp edges of the broken bone can be felt and seen.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies often on their back, and places one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with their hands, and carefully puts them even in all ways they can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then places emplasters and compresses above the subtle point of salt or other light wood, and wraps it in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the tie around to the back and tightens it evenly, and re-winds the bandage every hour, and if it loosens, tightens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and untie it, and remove the emplaster, and addresses what has come there in ways of cures; then resets the emplaster, and tightens it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	de la brisure des costes
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs happens only in large places after the back, and at the head inside, and they bend only because they are glarious; and one feels it well by examining the two sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration of it is that you put back the break even as it should be. Then places an emplaster, and ties it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is leaning inward, then the patient feels very great pain and piercing, as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lung; and they have difficulty breathing, and cough up a lot of blood, and it is a serious condition, and the ancients used to put great effort into treating it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say that one should give him foods that swell the belly, to push back the break from within.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, lest abscesses come if they were not there before.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they are there, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	"And they said that one should place cupping glasses on the spot to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glasses will draw out the excesses to the location due to the condition of weakness."
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	"And they said that one should cover the spot with moistened wool in hot oil, and then place tents between the ribs to make the belt equal, after which it should be treated with pleurisy treatment, flesh, and medicine."
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear on the bone that pierces the flesh, there is doubt for the patient whether one must cut above the location of the broken rib and place an instrument underneath to ward off the spleen; then one should carefully trim the bone and gently pull it out, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals. And if red hot inflammation comes, one should put moistened cloths in rose oil on the location; treat the location according to what is necessary for inflammation, and have the patient lie often on the side where they must be until they are healed."
de la brisure dou col	"de la brisure dou col"
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	"No fracture ever comes to the bones of the neck, and hardly does it bend; and likewise to the spine of the back."
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	"And when it happens to someone and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and lifeless, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that it is deadly in several conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are pressed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one applies treatment."
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	"And if something similar happens to the spine of the back and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accident has happened to both hands, and wind escapes from the back without control; and when one lies them on their stomach, wind escapes without control. And when they lie on their back and want to raise themselves, they cannot do so. Know that it is deadly: do not labor in its treatment."
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	"And if this accident does not happen to them, then the matter is lighter."
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	"And the treatment is that you should watch if there is hot inflammation, then put rose oil or goose grease on the spine until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, bind it with a bandage, and tell the patient to rest; and they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed."
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	"And if any bone dislocates, one must compress on the chest; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound if it is large with one stitch, then treat it with ointment that penetrates the flesh until it heals; and if the socket of the bone is broken, which is called the 'socket of the cow,' put your left hand's pouch into it and place it level with the other hand with all your strength, then put on a plaster and a splint if necessary; then compress it, and if there is dislocated bone, open it up and remove it, and treat the wound until it heals."
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Here is the translation for "de la brisure de l’os de la hainche":
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If it happens that the bone of the temple is broken, and if this happens, there occurs a slight diminution to the head; and it makes one lean forward, and declines towards the parted side, and pain comes to the patient at the place where it is broken, and pricking, and swelling at what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you raise your hand up until you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, then set this break so that it is in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or declines inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that the restoration of this break can be seen more easily.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it in its proper place, then put on the splint, then put a wooden or metal splint over it, and bind the break so that it does not move; and fill in the space under the ribs until the bandage is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on their sound side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if any inflammation comes, do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad complication; and that is the manner of treatment.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Regarding the break of the shoulder blade
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder blade is that which is between the ribs and the head of the shoulder bone. And if it is broken, it should be restored in one of these two ways:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two joints together with two strings and hang them from above, and have the patient sit on one seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood until it reaches the elbow, and place it in a curve of wood, then hang some heavy object or have the assistant pull it down; then put the break in line with your hands together so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is to place the patient on their backrest and have them put their hand on their neck, then command two assistants to each take one end of the break with their hands—the first one taking the top part and the second one taking the bottom—and extend each one towards its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the traction is too strong, then tie one string below the break and another above it, and have each assistant extend towards their side. And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, then you should put one string in the middle under the elbow and another towards the chest, under the break; likewise if the break is towards the chest, it is necessary to put one string lightly without effort so that the break is level on the left side and on the chest; then put the break back together as it should be and tie it tight, especially if there are any gaps.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if there are gaps present, then do not tie it too tightly for at least 28 days, and put wet linen on it and rose oil until the inflammation is calmed; then tie it tight, and the method to tie it is as follows: place the splint on the break, then bring the arm close to the support and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; then put the bandage on and tie it tightly onto the support and arm so that the arm is in line with the stars, unless something prevents it or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving back into place, then use stars (splints) and put one larger and stronger than the others on top of the break with two fingers' width between each splint. Each splint should be large enough to extend three fingers past the break on either side; then tie them on as I described at the beginning of this chapter for the break, tying more tightly and without stretching too much.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see that the position of the splints and the tension are as we have described when you put the broken limb back in place, and you suspect inflammation, then leave it tied for up to seven days as we have said; then check every three days to ensure that there is no itching or swelling around the bandage, or that the limb does not become numb due to the bandage being too tight. Then adjust as necessary as we have described.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; place one cushion full of even wool under the shoulder, and watch every hour during the day or night that the broken limb does not move or that the ligaments are not softened. Then straighten it through the power of medicine, and feed them the food we have mentioned earlier in such a way that initially the food is subtle; once they begin to recover, let it be coarse. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days altogether; then you should untie and administer baths and ointment medicines to set the joint correctly. But if the contraction is severe and twisted, it may take ten days or two months to untie.
de la brisure du bras	Of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones called the two "fossicles", one of which is small and supports the wrist; the other is large and is located beneath it towards the little finger. Sometimes only the large fossicle breaks, or sometimes only the small one does, but both may also break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bone is broken, the setting is easy and healing is quick; but when the large bone is broken, healing is difficult and more painful than if they were both broken together. If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently extended a little and set evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, then you must pull harder on the traction; extend it over one cushion and raise the palm of the hand higher than the other fingers, with the little finger lower than the others, and let the patient lie crossed on their back, with another cushion placed before them to prevent any discomfort. Then the ministers should stretch the upper arm at the part below the patient's hand using a sling or bandage; and another minister should apply traction from above. And then the physician should set it evenly according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are broken fragments in the fracture, then each should be placed back in its proper position; and if any fragment is too short to grasp with forceps, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have mentioned before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is also a wound from the breakage, I have spoken about it in the chapter on wounds specifically; so take care of it accordingly.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if swellings appear at the beginning of setting the bone, then take a cloth made from rose oil and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; tie it gently over the swelling until the inflammation has subsided. Then remove the cloth, apply the plaster made from flour with abundant egg, and place the splints on top. Make sure that the splint at the breakage site is stronger than the others and slightly wider; there should be six splints for the arm in various positions: whether the break is in one bone or two. Also, apply more traction above the break than elsewhere, and gradually decrease it as it heals, as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. Use soft, moist bandages on the break site to prevent them from being too hard or rough; use linen thread for tying that is neither too thick nor too thin, as we have discussed before. And recheck the limb and the splints after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	"And if some unfortunate event occurs in the limb, such as itching that affects the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching subsides; and allow the limb to rest, not too tightly. Then resume the restraint, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone is separated, and similar things, apply treatment."
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	"And if it is observed that the bandaging cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it thus for several days until the inflammation arrives, and then apply restraint."
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	"And if none of the things we have mentioned occurs in the patient, then do not remove the sling for up to 20 days or until it is complete. Then the person places their hands on their neck and keeps their neck straight; they observe movement and avoid dislodging, and sleep on their back. Know that this dislocation can be restored in 30 to 35 days, and sometimes even in 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the humors."
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and around both wrists, there are few fractures; it is mostly dislocation that occurs.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	"And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, then the patient must sit cross-legged and sit upright in front of them correctly. Then they place their hand on an extended table, and the physician extends the broken bones and aligns them so that they are well joined; and applies plasters and bandages if no infection occurs, then places a splint according to the quantity of the area affected; and is wrapped in one linen cloth."
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	"And if the fracture is at the edge around the belly of the palm, then make a splint of bandages and instruct the patient to tie it to their broken palm. Then bind it with a long bandage, and let the splint be made of soft cloth, as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it accordingly."
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	"And if the fracture is on the back of the hand, then you must place a splint above it and another below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight. Then bind it all around the hand, and make sure the binding between both wrists is secure."
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	"And if the fracture occurs on any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, then align it correctly and bind it with the palm. If you see fit, place a small straight splint to raise the fracture and keep it from moving. And if the fracture is on one of the other fingers, such as the index finger or another, align it and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or bind them all together in one bandage, whichever is more useful; or place a splint on it like the thumb. Be wary of inflammation during restoration and take care to treat any heat that may occur, as I have said."
de la cuixe brisie	Regarding the fractured hip:
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The hip bone is often broken, which can be seen when it rotates forwards and backwards; and the restoration of this involves tying one bandage above the break and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	Then the patient lies on their face, then each of the ministers extends their bandage to their side evenly; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the hip, one bandage should be towards the wrist, and the other bandages below the break. And likewise if it is near the knee, then one bandage should be near the knee, and the extension should be downward; then the surgeon puts the bone evenly with both hands until it is in its natural shape, and then puts on the splint and the bandages, taking care that nothing comes loose.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot swelling, let it cool down first before returning to your task and care; the bandage should be done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the break with one hard bandage doubled over twice or three times, and keep the excesses in place; then twist the leg so that the heel touches the root of the thigh, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee below, and bring the end of the thread upwards; then wrap the bandage around the leg and the thigh again, then place splints on both sides of the break and one on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to hold it evenly in place, then start tying tightly three or four times above the break, and when higher up on the break, tie more loosely; then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and tie them together with three splints that are on top, then go back down to the bottom of the thread until you reach the foot, and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this until there is no swelling or inflammation.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens that it becomes loose, untie it and address whatever has come undone, as we have said many times before. And if there are any pieces of bone sticking out, remove them if possible; otherwise, split the space and draw them out. Then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone breaks in such a way that splints are placed on it, as in the case of the elbow and arm. Nevertheless, with this type of restoration, the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is restored in about one month or a little less or a little more, depending on the differences in complexion.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the groove of the knee there are few breaks, but it bends many times. And if it does break, it is only a fracture or hole, and it happens with or without a wound, and this can be felt well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by putting back in place what was around it until it fits as well as possible. Then put on the splint and add a round splint if necessary, tying it tightly enough. Then follow all the precautions that we have mentioned for other fractures, such as heat and inflammation; then apply whatever is appropriate for each case until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called by right "mousel" and the other "fescile", and all kinds of fractures happen there just as they do in the arm. And for this reason, the restoration is done in the same way as that of the arm, and the precautions are all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken at once, the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fibula is broken, the foot turns inward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, great pain is felt, and it is clearly visible; and it twists below. Therefore, apply extension, place it evenly, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and lift according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, then take two strips of bark from the ash tree that will wrap around the leg on both sides and be as long as the leg from below the knee downwards; then wrap it in two layers with a bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend to the right or left at this point, and thus it is good. And some also use one splint of wood the length of the leg and place the leg on it to prevent movement, and this is done properly where there is a wound; and each day move the leg to see if there is any heat or other accident; and treat it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	The ankle does not suffer fractures, but sometimes bones in the foot are broken and so are the toes; and there are many ways of treating these injuries.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones in the foot, and you see these bones sticking up above each other, then place your bad foot on the ground, as if it wanted to go forward, and then put your good foot on top of the broken bones, where they are raised up; then press down until they return to their proper places. Then apply splints and dressings, and place a small table with two hollowed-out legs under the instep of the foot; then strap it firmly around the foot, then wrap it in cloths and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, then set them back in place as we have said for the fingers of the hand. Then put a splint on the broken toe according to its length and make it a little wider; then place the table that I mentioned under the foot and strap it firmly around it. And if there are two or three or more toes broken, then put a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and strap the table under the foot; and let them be placed at the top of the table so that they touch the underside of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned for other fractures, and treat each injury according to how it ought to be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the thumb bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's thumb is broken, have her sit down and lean back towards the side of her back, held by someone behind her. Then fill up the palm with cotton and put in it a piece as big as a large bean. Then lift the woman up little by little, and the cotton will come out until it reaches the opening of the vagina, and the bone will return to its place with the bean. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has done so, put it back in again, and do this for seven days or thereabouts: then the fracture will be healed. Then take a sheep's bladder and tie a tube at the opening, blow into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside, and the vagina will return to its normal shape. Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of a man's thumb is broken, or that of a woman, restore it as we have said for the bone of the shinbone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply themselves to study and practice, and understand my book. For the fracture indicates in many ways the right path to restoration: so listen carefully.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the penis is broken, take a goose's neck and put it on the penis; then wrap cloths around it and leave it for three or four days, and it will soon be healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for anyone who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the arm or similar, to be healed now, according to the treatments that we have mentioned.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then rinse it with vinegar or nitre, and begin to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, provided that no fever ensues.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if a fever ensues, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the inflammation is calmed, and do not attempt to touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you cause further harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is exposed above the heart, then it is necessary for you to put it back in place quickly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable for putting it back in place with your hands, then use this iron instrument, which has seven or eight fingers of length and its width according to the size of the wound. And it is necessary for the doctor to shape three or four of them according to what is needed in each case of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your procedure. And have it pointed at the front and thicker at the middle towards the front like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a "palmstone," and it must be placed on the bent knee, with the broken bone sticking out; then push it in at once until they come together evenly. And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot grip the bone properly, then cut off the end of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it better.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot put the bone back in place as we have said, then cut off the excess with an instrument suitable for this purpose, such as a chisel or a knife. Then smooth off the rough edges and small fragments that remain on the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone has been put back in place and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Then do everything possible to put it back in its proper place. Then moisten a cloth with black styptic wine, especially if it is summer; and do not put cerote or any other substance containing oil on the wound, as this will cause corruption and gangrene. Then apply bandages when you have restored the bone, but leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the skin all around according to the size of the wound. And be careful that the dressing does not exert pressure on the fracture; many foolish doctors have done this and caused harm or death to their patients. And let the bandage be softer and gentler than usual for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large and you fear that some mischief may come of it, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then do not put on bandages but wrap it with hard cloths instead, and tie them up. And when you see after one or two days that the wound has begun to become inflamed, then remove what you have placed there previously, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, such as tetrapharmakon ointment or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	"And it is necessary that you wash the member twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is clean and healthy."
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	"And the limb must be positioned in such a way that the bowel moves down easily."
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	"And if many days pass and it does not heal but the bowel returns again, know that there are small bone fragments, so you must clean the wound with a cloth and remove all these unwanted pieces that cause this pain."
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	"And if fistulas appear or other signs of corruption, you must treat them according to what is said in the chapter above. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the thighbone or the elbow, and others similar in large limbs, do not pull it out because often the flesh will come with it, but let it be until it rots; perhaps it will fall off by itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone."
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	"of the bruises that come on the sore"
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	"We often see afterwards the condition of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and the sight of the limb's figure is unpleasant; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions."
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	"Therefore, beware if the bone is fresh: if the physician applies medicines that are astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together and mix them with tincture of wine or with egg yolk or with garlic; and put them on the bone in poultices, and bind it well and do not remove it for several days; and then remove it, and begin again another one until the swelling is gone; or you can bind a well-made piece of lead onto it; because the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs. And if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut off the excess above and make the apparent superf
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	"of the limb which becomes weak after the treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	"If the fracture of the bone is healed and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings and nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of too much exercise; or because of too sudden movements, not at the right time; or because there was little blood in his body, so he is weak."
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	"And the cure is to make the sick person eat and make his body supple until blood is multiplied in him; and apply baths, and give him joy and pleasure; then put pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts great nourishment, and often rub it with warm water until nourishment reaches the limb; and finally return it to its natural figure."
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	"of the limb twisted after the healing"
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after being restored, and the broken bone becomes visible, and the form of the limb is unsightly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: thus do not believe the foolish who say one must break the limb again anew, many a foolish physician has done this in our land; and these works are blameworthy, and great evils come of them, sometimes even death. Nonetheless, if the joints and ligaments are fresh, they should be rinsed with hot water, or softening herbs should be cooked, such as willow leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make one soft plaster, such as diacylon well made, and take the mucilage of willow, and cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and apply the plaster on. Or take ripe figs, crush them with fennel seed, and similar medicines that soften the adhesion.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the joints are removed due to continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands. And arrange for the limb to be moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is inveterate and hardened like stone, and it needs to be cut away with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone with a fine, light scalpel; and put care and skill into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint is displaced from its proper place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and the sufferer feels great pain and great injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, it must now be reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the place swells up, and sometimes it is scarcely reset to its place; therefore it must not be moved while it is swollen. Often this causes spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	If this happens, nonetheless, cleanse the patient first, then leave him until the inflammation has subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it comes back into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have arranged chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	Of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and they become slightly displaced from their position, which makes them softened a little; sometimes both of them are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, causing saliva to drip out of the mouth so that it cannot be held in, nor can the mouth be closed, and speech becomes tangled with the tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it returns by itself with more dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	But if the dislocation is complete and well-developed, you must reset it quickly without hesitation;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in this manner the servant shall hold the head of the patient, and the master shall place his little bag from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands shall be free to put them evenly; and command the patient that they should soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the master will put it back in place until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jawbone is dislocated, even if both jaws are dislocated together, then apply hot water and oil so that they can move more easily; do not force them back into place, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are put back in place evenly and the mouth of the patient is closed without being too softened, then put warm compresses made from a plaster consisting of rose oil and wax on it, then bind it gently with soft linen.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And the patient should sleep on their back with two pillows placed between their legs so that they do not move to the right or left nor try to chew but take soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then they may eat whatever they wish gently, and need not open their mouth widely while eating or drinking until the jawbone is completely healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if both jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their proper position, then fever and chills will ensue, and sometimes diarrhea, and sometimes vomiting of bile alone.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see these symptoms, then know that it is a loss [of life]; and many times the person to whom this happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	Jaw dislocations are treated using forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The jaw cannot be dislocated on the side towards its continuity with the ear, and sometimes it is dislocated backwards, which can be felt distinctly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the treatment is as follows: The patient lies on their back with arms extended. Then press firmly with your palm at the affected area and it will return to its proper place. Then apply the plaster and bandage it tightly;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head that faces towards the side cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocation occurs once, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then place the splint and bandage, and constrain it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	Similarly, when the head of the shoulder is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	The shoulder only dislocates in three ways: one is that it dislocates at the part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the elbow; and rarely does it dislocate above, which happens seldom.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate internally for the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially those who have little flesh, because then it jumps suddenly; those with enough flesh, it jumps hardly at all, nor does it return hardly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes in certain men there is injury or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with heat and swelling, and they believe that it has been dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you should examine it until you are certain; then begin the treatment
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And dislocation is known when it is down towards the armpit, and a distinction is made between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	You will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the armpit touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand near to their neck nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	Furthermore, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed because you can feel it clearly upon touching it
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation cannot be reduced except when it is recent or if the child is ill
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the surgeon to lift the hand of the patient upwards, then place their fingers beneath the armpit and forcefully raise the joint upwards in its place, and the surgeon lifts the hand up and places it underneath it will quickly come back into place
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come back as we have said within several days afterwards, then the patient should be bathed in warm water, and the surgeon should apply mollifying and soothing ointments such as decoction of mallow, fenugreek, and meadowsweet in water
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be put to sleep on their back, and a pad of linen, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed beneath the armpit. Then the surgeon places their heel on the pad, gently lifts up the head of the shoulder, and pulls the hand of the patient
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another assistant should hold the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; then this shoulder comes back into place immediately. And if you wish to see how to do it in this manner
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	And it is that you have present one man who is larger than the patient. He should stand upright beside the patient's side and place his shoulder beneath the armpit of the patient, then lift up the armpit so that the patient hangs from his arm
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And another assistant pulls the hand of the patient down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then hang some heavy object with him and the dislocation will come back into place
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the dislocation can also be reduced in another manner: take a long stick and plant it firmly into the ground so that its head is as high as a man's fist and neither too thick nor too thin
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then place it beneath the patient but with soft cloths underneath so that they do not get hurt. The patient should stand up on the long stick and then stretch their hand downwards on the other side, and the dislocation will quickly return to its place
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if the dislocation does not want to come back into place despite all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick two cubits long and four fingers wide, with a thick head for entering in deep beneath the armpit, shaped like this:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place on the head of the patient a cloth dampened with water so that the wood does not burn him; then put it under his armpit; and extend his arm over the log; and tie the shoulder to the log, and the arm at the hand's elbow joint, then put the arm over one step of a ladder wide enough, and let the hand hang downwards, and leave the body hanging on the other side: The dislocation will now be reduced.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, whatever way this may be, then you must put under the armpit a wad of wool equal in size; then place on the shoulder the emplastrum prepared with powder from the millstone, with incense and albumen of egg all around; then draw it under the armpit gradually, and turn the bandage over the emplastrum, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he consume little food until the member is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then consume more afterwards after five or six days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen with moisture that has come there, or for some other reason, then you must administer cauteries at three points, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and afterwards after twenty days the joint is still dislocated, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be reduced to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the breast and the paps, or behind, is made by impulse and extension of hands, and another bandage is administered to it; and care must be taken until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing pain comes to the member and slowness in movement, then the sick person should take many baths until that pain is alleviated and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated forwards and returns forwards; and if it is dislocated in all directions, especially forwards and backwards, and the dislocation has not been reduced, for one can see and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is displaced and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reduce it before swelling comes there, for if swelling comes there, then reduction will be difficult; and perhaps it cannot be reduced entirely, especially if it is behind; so this dislocation is worse than others, and is of greater pain, and sometimes death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the reduction is when it can be reduced in such a way that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread apart, and place the joints of your fingers according to the neck around, above, and below, and push the joint into his palm together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forwards, then it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and pushes the neck that is dislocated from the root of the palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it will not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and this is how: two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then twist the arm in each direction, and then wrap a doubled cloth long and wide around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	And when the physician has joined the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and then push the joint strongly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in its place, then put on a dry compress with album of egg, and bind it strongly, and suspend the arm around the neck of the sick person, and leave it for several days, and then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, then untie the bandage and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint has not healed well, then recommence the compress and the bandage, and leave it on for several days until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after the reduction of the joint and it moves, then bathe him and rub him well, and press until he is relieved; or you put on a lamb's wool poultice, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter into the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, if you rub the joint moderately, then put the lamb's wool poultice back on and let him enter into the bath; do this two or three times until he is healed; and if it is necessary, then put on hot compresses of fresh cheese with butter, and bind them on tightly; then it will return to its normal condition.
li dislocation de la main	Dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is easy to reduce, easier than other joints. Nevertheless, it should be reduced as quickly as possible in the very hour that it occurs, before the place becomes swollen or a hot swelling comes there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reduction is done thus: put the sick hand on a table, and let the ministers extend it, and let the physician place his hand upon it so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Nevertheless, you should look to see if it is well in place; then let the sick person put the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the sick person put the back of his hand on the table and let the physician place his hand upon that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply compresses to relieve swelling and leave them on without recommencing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you are not able to put it in place after several days, then the joint will remain twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	"And harm nothing to the sick except that as long as the hand is weakened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves or the arteries are cut; so there is no other means of healing than by applying a fire cautery nearby, and perhaps nothing else helps."
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	"And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it so."
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply warm water poultice, and rub it until it becomes flexible."
de la dislocation des dois de la main	"On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	"No dislocation of the fingers of the hand occurs at each part, neither on the back of the palm nor on the front."
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	"Therefore grasp the finger and push the dislocation back until it returns, then support the head of the finger and press it towards the part where it was dislocated;"
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	"and leave it for two days, then set it equal that day; and do not bind it again until we have said so, and on the third day remove it, and make him move it, and bind it again tightly; and do this repeatedly until it is strong."
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	"And do the same if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is flexible; and do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere."
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	"On the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back"
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	"If the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death quickly ensues."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	"And the sign is that the patient suddenly jumps up involuntarily, and cannot control it, and often times some member becomes paralyzed, either both thighs or both arms or one."
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	"And often times the shoulder blade moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called 'gilbositez':"
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	"The remedy is that you examine if the 'gilbositez' has come from childhood: if it has not, then there is no remedy nor healing for it at all."
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	"And that which comes from a fall or blow or similar things, the ancient authors propose various remedies with great words, but they are not of much benefit in all cases;"
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	"but I have summarized it according to my intention and formed various instruments."
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	"I say that in the case of 'gilbositez' which comes to the front of the chest, there is no remedy nor healing;"
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	"and likewise that which comes directly into both sides, and it cannot be cured except for that one which comes properly to the back, as I say;"
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	"And let the patient lie on his face on an even surface, and have a bolster under him so that he does not bruise himself;"
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	"then stick a stake at the head of the bed firmly into the ground, and another at the foot, and bind one rope around the hips of the patient, and another at the thighs, knees, and ankles;"
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	"and two assistants know how to hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the foot, between the two stakes;"
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	"and let them be well tied, both the stake as we have said and the physician place his palms firmly on the shoulder blade until it returns."
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	"And if the shoulder blade does not return with this remedy, then take a board three spans long and place it under the patient's back while he is lying on his side, and put the end of the board under the shoulder blade, then place the middle of the board on the shoulder blade;"
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	"and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you wish, do this for the one that turns towards the hand."
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	"And let two stakes be stuck into the head of the bed and two others towards the foot, each stake having a space of one span between them above and below;"
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	"and let there be a hole in each stake where the dislocation occurs, and let the stakes be firmly fixed into the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of stakes let there be one turning stake on which the rope turns, and let there be two small stakes of one span long in the two turning stakes to turn the dislocation;"
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	"and then tie the rope that is around the hips to the dislocation near the head and the other rope to the dislocation towards the feet, and each assistant shall turn his stake with all their strength, and the master shall put the shoulder blade back in place as we have said."
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	"When it is back in place, then put on a dry bandage with plenty of egg, and then apply hot poultices, and then place an iron plate three digits long so that it covers the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine, and then bind it with a rope as we have said, and let the patient use gentle nourishment until he is healed."
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	"And if any hindrance occurs at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications with the iron plate that we mentioned earlier; and sometimes one may administer a piece of lead;"
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	"and sometimes an appearance occurs in the back of the spine and it is thought to be a dislocation, but this is not so because it is merely a bone protruding outwards, for which reason one should not presume that it is dislocated since this could cause death."
des dislocations de la hainche	"Dislocations of the hip"
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder are dislocated only by dislocation, not as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; but mostly inside others, and little dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when you join the lame leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the lame knee opens more than the healthy one, and the lame one cannot bend at the knee.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the place near it is swollen with a hot boil because the bone of the thigh comes there
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one whom it happens outside is that this accident is opposite to those in front
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of one whom it happens in front is that his leg seems well put together; nevertheless, he cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so, and retains his urine, and the ankle swells up, and when he walks, he leans on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of one whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten or bend his knee, and this leg is twisted compared to the other; the ankle is softened, and the bone of the thigh is located below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you should check if the dislocation is old, and it remains in its position without any care; and there should not be any pride [in the affected person].
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you should hurry to put the joint back in place, both inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return [to its normal position], and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, you must arrange for one strong helper, and stretch the leg strongly with both hands, or use one rope tied above the knee
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another helper extends his hand above in such a way that he places his hands under the buttocks, then pulls gently on one rope tied around the thigh, and another helper holds the end of the rope
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and all stretch together upwards and downwards at once until the affected person is lifted off the ground simultaneously and remains hanging
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of stretching applies to four types of dislocation. If the dislocation has returned [to its normal position], as we have said, that is good
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, you must treat according to its type. When the dislocation is at the hip joint, you should put the affected person on his sound side, then place the rope on the root of the thigh and below the ankle, then stretch the rope upwards towards the ankle and the buttock
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then another helper takes the affected person's arms and embraces the large bone of the thigh and stretches it strongly outwards: now it will return to its place; this type of dislocation is easier than others
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot put it back in place with the method we have described, then you should tie both feet of the affected person together with a soft rope around both heels and knees, and extend the affected leg two spans more than the other leg
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then hang them from the top of a beam so that they are two arms' length above the ground; then command one helper to embrace the thigh at the hip joint, and another helper to hang with the affected person and embrace the thigh strongly, for the joint will now return quickly
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is outwards, the affected person should lie down as we have described for someone with goitre, and stretch one rope properly around the affected leg and also around the foot
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place two stakes, one at the head and one at the feet, then insert one stake between the thighs of the affected person in the shape of a V;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	"Let moist rags be placed around it so that the patient does not blister, then each assistant should extend towards him and the doctor set his hand evenly on the dislocation."
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	"If it comes back, that's good. If not, then place it on the table and press down as we have described in dislocation of the hip joint, with the patient lying on his sound side."
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	"And when the dislocation is anterior, then extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said, and let the doctor place his pain on being above the affected ankle joint, then press with his other hand below towards the knee."
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	"And if the dislocation is posterior, then do not extend the leg downwards or raise it off the ground, but rather let it be as it was when the hip joint dislocated backwards, just as we have said about childbirth on the two hips."
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	"and place it face up, with the sheet extended as we have described earlier, and let him press down on the joint with his hand on the table;"
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	"And it will be in place when the patient extends their legs and they are even. Then join the thighs together, place the splint, and secure with a bandage so that the hip does not move."
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	"And let it remain bound like this for three or four days, then remove the splint and place it again if necessary. After another three days, remove the binding and allow the patient to move about gently until the member is comfortable."
de la dislocation dou genoil	Chapter on dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	"The kneecap can dislocate in three ways: inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward."
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	"And the sign is that when you ask the patient to bend their leg at the hip, if it does not articulate with the thigh, then know that it is dislocated."
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	"And the reduction for all of them is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend their leg if possible. Then place your back against theirs and put their foot on yours;"
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	"then grasp the patient's kneecap with your palms and draw it back between your two hands. Then bend both sides of the knee joint forcefully. Another assistant should extend the patient's foot until the kneecap returns to its proper position, and the sign that it is in place is when it articulates lightly with the thigh."
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	"And then place the splint on it and keep the leg articulated with the thigh for three or four days, binding them together tightly. Then remove the splint, but do not allow the patient to move until the member is comfortable."
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if the member is not in place, then extend it forcefully as we have described for dislocations of the hip joint until it is reduced."
de la dislocation dou talon	Chapter on dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	"The heel can sometimes be wry and sometimes completely dislocated, both inward and outward."
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	"And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and sticks out on the side where it is dislocated:"
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	"The reduction is easy when the heel is only wry, and one should gently extend the foot with both hands."
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	"But when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit up straight and have one assistant pull them forward by the leg above the ankle;"
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	"then draw the foot towards you with your right hand and then your left hand twice. Then extend it upwards and gently push the foot up into place;"
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	"and do this two times as described, pushing and pulling the foot until it returns to its proper position. If not, begin again because sometimes it takes several attempts;"
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	"If it cannot be reduced this way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground and firmly plant a stake in the earth between their thighs. Then tie cloths around it so that they do not hurt the patient;"
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	"then have one assistant pull on the thigh while another extends the foot with their hands or with a bandage tied to the heel;"
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	"then both assistants extend evenly and keep the stake between the patient's thighs to hold them down while extending."
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	"Then the surgeon places their hands evenly on either side of the dislocation, and another assistant pulls gently on the healthy leg below while holding it straight. The dislocation will quickly return to its proper position."
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	"And when it is in place, put the splint and padding on it. Then apply pressure firmly and bind the foot to the leg. Be careful with the ligaments above the ankle behind, so that the bandage is not too tight."
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	"Then leave it bound for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, retighten it. Remove it on the third or fourth day and keep the patient from walking for four days."
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	"And if they walk before this time is up, there is no guarantee that it will not dislocate again."
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If inflammation occurs around the dislocation, you must calm it as we have described elsewhere until it is healed."
des dois	Chapter on dislocations of the fingers
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	"When the fingers are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, which is easy to do."
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	"But if the dislocation is at any of the joints on the back of the hand or fingers, make the patient sit up straight on a chair or table and place your foot on the affected joint. Then press down firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position;"
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"and when it is even and there is no gap, place a board with two legs under the sole of your foot. Then press down firmly and leave it bound for three days before removing it. Have the patient rest until they are healed."
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Chapter on wounds accompanied by dislocations
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	If a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it,
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If thou art not presumptuous in the cure, if thou art not wise in the art and hast not used it long, and if thou art pitying, merciful, and slow, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And in the beginning use things that calm inflammation and heat, and leave the patient in the hand of God if thou dost not see hope for healing.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	And when thou dost see hope [of recovery], then straightway reduce the limb to its place before the hot inflammation arrives.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, then administer things that calm inflammation and heat, and dress the wound as it ought to be with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is fracture or small bones dislocated, then set them and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And beware of entering into the path of fear, as I have said, for it avails thee more according to thy Creator, and for the health of thine arm and thy body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	The end of the book of physic
