Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The words of Albuca's doctrine begin here.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, according to its conclusion and through my explanations and declarations, it appears to me that you will be able to grasp what I wish to convey to you in this treatise, which is a part of surgical operation.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Now the surgical operation is almost lost in our region and in our time, so that the science of it has perished, and its knowledge remains hidden; and there remain only a few brief descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted by many errors and obscurities, so that the intentions of it are closed off and its power and art are stretched out.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it appears to me that you will revitalize the ancient order of this treatise through the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that, you should come with the forms of the instruments of cauterization and other tools of the work, as is necessary for addition to the declaration and preparation of what is to be done.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	However, the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his own hand in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and requires its actor to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well, so that he could know the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and the arrangement of them; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of their efflux.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore says Hippocrates that with a small name one can accomplish much, but most of all in the work of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this about him in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about anatomy as we have described it, will certainly fall into error by which men are killed, just as I have seen many of them, because some are formed in this science and then stray from that true science and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor who had inserted an abscess into the throat of a woman, and had cut through some arteries in the throat, so that a great deal of blood flowed out and the woman died among others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who told him to pull out a stone from a man's bladder, which he had processed in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and he extracted that stone with a piece of the intestines, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already cried out against it, and saw that because of the largeness of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knew in advance that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and then operated on a blacksmith's leg which was broken in the joint; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pulleys and astels with strong tension, and did not give the wound any breath.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he loosened the bandage according to his desires, and then released the ligature, and then left it untied for some days, and commanded that we loosen the tie; and thus it happened that the joint and leg became inflamed, and ultimately led to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the tie, and he gained tranquility and eventually became free from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained and did not cease to corrupt the member until the patient was endangered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated within a few days, until the wickedness of it increased with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which is because the cancerous tumor is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not need to be treated with iron throughout, but rather should be considered as a member which suffers from being totally attacked.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, children, it is necessary for you to divide the surgical operation into two parts: one is in the operation which is associated with health, and the other is in the work where danger lies in the greater dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in every place of this book where the operation is one in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this and avoid that, so that foolishness does not obstruct the way to speak and to deceive.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your own arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your own patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best means by the grace of God to avoid losing health and the noble succession, and abandon the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and hold your own arms from this which makes you fear, so that your situation remains in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: because it is more remaining to your glory, and all the more in this world and forever in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen already said in some of his own writings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not heal bad illnesses, because bad doctors are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and the first part of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter, arranged from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and ironwork of cauterization, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, wounds, and extraction of splinters and similar things, entirely chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on curing of torsion and similar things; chapter ordered from head to foot, and in the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauterization with fire and acute medicine, and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	You should know the quality of the joints of that cauterization and the nonuments of it, and in what composition it is prohibited to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joint of cauterization and its nonument is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secret and hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and among them there has been disagreement, and for my part, I will not venture to recount all their sermons, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization agrees with all universal composition universally, which is in matter or its matter, except for two compositions, which are compositions without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and withered composition with material it will desiccate; because some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the opposite of that, that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, for nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the diseased part, which is hot and dry, should be healed with heat and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And you will find that the one who says the opposite of that is wrong, for through cauterization it is made to heal in all hot and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men; because when you compare the human body and its humors with the composition of fire, you find the human body cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already shown me several times to uncover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But however it is not necessary that what has already been explained and exercised in the chapter on cauterization should come again over this, for I have already known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of theirs, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other compositions, there is no fear for you, and most of all in cold and humid diseases, because already all doctors have agreed on those, and are not discordant in the treatment with cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, children, that from the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it, there is something more about cauterization with medicine combined, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not affect except the member that is being cauterized, and does not harm another member adjusted to it but with a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of combined medicine reaches that member which is distant from it, and very easily brings disease to a difficult-to-heal member and very easily causes harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, due to its sublimity and good substance, does not do this except in a superfluous way. And it is already known to us by experiment and the length of service in studying the art above the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused for the length of the sermon. But if it were not that it is not read in your free book in this pause, I would reveal to you a secret hidden with the fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, with a philosophical and demonstrative sermon, which would be sharpened in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cauterization and pause for the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at any time, because the harm caused by the accidental timing is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cauterization, and most of all if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fierce, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared that those who bring evil may come, which is greater than a small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it does not occur in your minds, or, children, that this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, for it is that to that disease which is healed by cauterization there is no reduction at all times, and they pause on the consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus as they say, for cauterization is nothing but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But however, cauterization exceeds medicine by the will of its virtue and the grandeur of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that its disease may return at some hour of time, according to the composition of the patient and the location of its disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it from the accumulation of superfluities there, and what has been gained through its acquisition in foods and similar causes; but if the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humors, as with cauterization for toothache and similar pains, it is possible that this pain will not return in full, but rather becomes small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is also common saying that cauterization is the ultimate remedy of medicine, and it is a saying that is most true, not to what they understand in it, because they believe that there is no healing that is beneficial through medicine or any other cause approaching cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that cauterization is the ultimate remedy of medicine not only when we administer the healing methods in some diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and approaching the end of the cause, one administers cauterization, and it proves to be beneficial.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from now on, know that cauterization is the ultimate remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand as common and foolish among doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and its sublime substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a difference, as it is not absolutely true, because you have already proven and proved that it does not make a difference in some bodies except for others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you do cauterization with fire using gold, it is not declared to you, because it is hidden according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and since you prepare to receive heat; and if you adjust above it ignition so that the gold melts in the fire, and the craftsman sees through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is necessary to perform cauterization with iron more lightly and more precisely in order to achieve the rightness of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have organized those from head to foot, in order that the demanding one may be satisfied with it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On Cauterization for Headache due to Coldness and Humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is applied to the humidification and coldness on the upper part of the head, which has two causes: one cause being soda and another being a great flow of rheumatic fluid, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears that are fluent, and a great deal of sleepiness, and toothaches, and pain in the jaw, and universally all diseases that come through coldness, such as paralysis, sodomy, apoplexy, and similar things in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine in the morning, for three or four nights, according to what the disease demands and the age and habit of the patient.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and after that make a section between the hairs on top of his head, and place it on a well-crafted bench, so that he may rest his head on his own feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor's edge against the tip of your nose, right between the eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the fire is reached, mark that place with a tent, and then ignite the cauterization oil of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause that oil on the marked place with a tent, in such a way that it descends, by which your own hand is gradually constrained, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the place, and if you see that some quantity of bone is already uncovered from the head, such as the amount of grain in errors, then raise your hand and if it is not returned to the iron, use another one that is not chilled, until what I have said to you is seen.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and let it sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then apply to it a poultice of beggar's ticks and let it sit on the wound until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with four-fold medicine, so that it may be healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better it is for the cauterization to be applied, because it is more effective and beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that some of them were cauterized in the cord into the bone, and kept the cauterization until it was absorbed by some part of the specificity of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then be rubbed with that which is adapted to the bone, and then be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cauterization, it will reach the end, until it presses strongly on the bone, until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alfalfa.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that from that place, the fumes of the head will evaporate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And then the open wound should be kept for a long time, and after that it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, these two species of cauterization do not seem right at all, except in certain men according to the way of fear; and leave that, I say, is better for health when it is, because the head is revealed by solution of continuity, as we have testified in other members, and even more so when the patient's head is of a free nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better, as I say; and from that house and with that work, health ensues.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the Cauterization of the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the entire head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of warps, cochias, capipurges, emplausters, guats, cadels, and gualinas, and similar things, and most especially if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not benefit him at all, then consider that whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in his nature; and if it is not free and finds a great deal of coldness, then he cauterizes another cautery, leaving just a little bit.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the horn of his head with another cautery until the cord is parted.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and have it revealed on the bone the quantity which we have recounted, and cauterize that with one cautery in the back part of the head, in the place called "vas", where the wind is paused.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And let your hand be in that way, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient by this will feel a great deal of diverse pain different from all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will say that this cautery is in its place, for it is necessary to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than that which is used on the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Third Chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization for Headaches not Caused by Ancient Causes.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When headache occurs in the back part of the head, or it is spread into the eye, be evacuated with medicines in the morning, and administer another treatment, which I have said in the divisions of diseases; and if nothing benefits, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either by medicine acute and combined, or by iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But the cauterization by medicine combined is that you take a sweet of aloes, and soak it in water, and abscind the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut the location of pain in the temple with a blunt lancet until a small pit is made, and it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply it to the place with a stopper made of descending constriction, and leave it for three hours; and then remove it and treat the aloes, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then apply a poultice on top submerged in mud until the place becomes firm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with four-fold medicine, so that it may be healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some combined medicines that I have written in the two treatises on combined medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization by iron, according to this manner: ignite by the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claw's claw", because the head of it is like a shape of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small elevation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place the iron on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that it is not absorbed by the cord that is left - and turn the small iron gradually with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is absorbed by the specificity of the cord is as great as the majority of it, and lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not absorbed, lest there come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the poultice in saltwater and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a mullet poultice wrapped in mud, and then cure with four-fold medicine until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the cutlery according to the cautery, and beware of cutting off an artery in this not ancient headache properly.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Cauterization for Ancient Headaches.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat headaches with what we have said in the previous treatment and in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not benefit, and sometimes the disease is so severe that it does not reach the point where we have described the first cautery by medicine or by fire, then it is necessary to ignite the cutlery cautery until it is white, because you signify on the location of pain with a line of length which is most of the digit or what it may be; and place your hand for one moment and strengthen that until you cut off the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is modified by mastication, and that the lacrimal duct not be absorbed and the nerves that accompany that, and that no spasm ensues.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut off, for in the cutting off of it there is fear, and especially to him who ignores this process and does not study or practice; and leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come to remember the regimen of accidental bleeding from the artery according to your own manner in this very book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not yield to this cautery and you see the patient's body is tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on stretching of artery with two handles, and this is the better cautery and most concurrent.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On Cauterization for Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain caused by cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with other treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called "puncta", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the puncta to the ignition, and be brought around the entire ear as a wheel is revolved, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in each.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	And then stretch yourself with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little until you have marked the location with a tent.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these dots is applied to the entire ear, and in each place, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On Cauterization for Torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and by cauterization it is not but of the species which come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture with jarrings and capipurgisms and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not confirm, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first on the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And then pause your cautery on the contrary side of the ailing part, for softening does not come but on the opposite side that appears to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the horn of the head, and in the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's joint, and then place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the cord's specific part is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the cutlery, the form of which is placed before us.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however subtle it may be, that a little bit is as you see it; and it is necessary to cut off the superfluous thickening a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with what is before us, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with what we have said, and your treatment does not confirm, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of his head; and with a cautery in the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with another one in the occiput.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is made according to what was previously said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and this is the last one; and then it should be cured with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Cauterization for Oblivion caused by Flux.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large jarrings and pills of purging medicines.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the head of the patient and apply an ointment to the occiput, as described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause it for a few days, because this is the manner of the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do so according to that order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if it is well healed by those means; and otherwise, then do so to the three cauteries in the back part of his head, which are descendants from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with what has proceeded.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to add more and the patient is tolerating it well, then do so to the middle part; and if you wish for even greater addition, then immediately cauterize that on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And then cure that until it is healed; and be the cautery olive-colored according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Take care to process the head with jarrings and with what we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with another one on all the horns of the head, and with another one on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body of many and the patients are tolerating well, but the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually with one cautery until the cord's movement of life is consumed, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that until it is healed, and this be olive-colored cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Cauterization for Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is cauterized the epileptic, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus, it is necessary to purge the brain of him at the beginning with jarrings and with other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant except for the exemption of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarisms and mastiguoars as purgatives, before this for several days, with good food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with one cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another one on the occiput, and each horn of the head is cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries which I say, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And be olive-colored according to what has been previously said.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause on a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and flux is gross, then cauterize that with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity that declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of it according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a tortoise shell decently made of it over the circle, and then place that in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated comfortably, and held by all parties.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice; and it is more worthy of an ancient border of sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with a tempered heat by measure, which said enough when it is more in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle part of the head of him in the circle, and let it be there until it is cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient for a whole week once, with another regimen of it good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to what is most of it, so that you hold your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a species of cauterization which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then put that in a cloth or in gray gauze, wrapped around it.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Cauterization for Water that Descends into the Headache.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared the beginning of water in the head for the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of it, and guard against all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water in two heads, or of one side if it is the beginning of water in one head.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And then cut all the veins and arteries that are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard yourself from fluxes of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see any bleeding from him, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the absorption of those and caution against bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is cauterized on the cervical vertebrae left between two bones with two cauteries gradually produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On Cauterization for Old Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the head are ancient and hardened through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place on the outside of the head, and it is verified that this is superfluous watery flux, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water descending into the head, and with a cautery in the middle part of the head and two cauteries in the cervical vertebrae left between two temples, and with two cauteries in the cervical vertebrae left between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need addition, then cauterize that on the entire back of the head above the forehead with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterization for Stench of Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with water which we have said in the division and it does not improve your treatment, then prepare and give to drink to the patient the cohies for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize it with a white cautery and an olive-colored cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cautery and two cauteries on both forehead areas, just above the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard yourself from cutting into the artery, lest you hurt it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the clove-shaped cautery, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening of Eyelids of the Head.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the head is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery having this lunary shape; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that on both forehead areas a little with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the forehead.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand and the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is habituated.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Head when the skin is transformed into inner parts and pushes the head.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the head is transformed into inner parts just as it pushes the head, then cauterize those in two manners, either by fire or by a medicine that combines.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If by a cautery of fire, command the patient beforehand to wash his skin thus as those who cleanse it, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you push that which makes them swell, then take away their swelling, you strengthen the head of him with a bandage so that it is not hurt until the skin is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, then pause the patient's head in your sight, and then sign on the eyelid of his head with a tenta, with a signal which is according to the figure of a mertal leaf, and let it be the beginning of the signal just above the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then put a cloth wrapped in alum or in mucilage of pellitory on the head.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery which is this shape of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure which you have signaled, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the cord is burned just like a leaf of myrtle, all appearing properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health from this work is that you see the eyelid of the head already contracted and the skin of it elevated above the point of the head.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then elevate your hand and let it be for three days, and then pause on the cloth with a border until the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if some cause returns to the skin and causes swelling again, and the eyelid is softened, then do it again as you did first time.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is in the eyelid left behind, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not push against the head.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with a medicine that combines is what you command the patient to wash his skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a cloth of paper in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take one ounce of known salt and one ounce of living cause. The end! And thus it is, and then mix those causes well, and make this with a feast in order that it may not be cooled; and then spread water on the paper which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that over one head or both heads; and pause behind the head cloth wrapped in alum, and the patient's head be in your sight.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press it a little bit, but do not hurt it until the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, because stinging is in it just like from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus when the patient perceives that it is getting stinging, then pause the medicine and stop hurting it with your said thing; therefore when the stinging ceases, then wash away the medicine and rinse the head with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted as washed by fire or incision, because you are satisfied; and if not, then go back to applying the medicine on the location where it has not yet taken effect and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the head is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on the cloth with a border until the scar of adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or another substance until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to keep with diligent vigilance that the medicine does not fall on the head, and if the eyelid some days later becomes softened and some cause of skin pushes into the head, then iterate your medicine on that location where the eyelid has become softened, and just as you did at the beginning, and then apply it again until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the heads of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And may not be hidden the way of rectitude from him who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Lachrymal of the Head.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with the water that we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confirm your cure, then be it so that you cauterize that according to this manner: command the patient to pause his head in your sight, and hold his head by some minister between your hands in such a way that it is not hurt nor agitated with his own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then put a cloth wrapped in alum or in mucilage of pellitory on the head of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery which is this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	the one that is curved, like the form of a reed or a pen nib of a writer, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, be penetrating into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it be like a test.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But in any case, the one that is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the congealed matter from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then pause on it the cautery which is well ignited, and apply that to your hand a little bit at the point of the head where the nose begins, so that you do not err with your hand or disturb the patient, and then pause the cautery on the gray hairs of the head and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, it is well; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave that as is for three days, and then pause on that cloth with a border and surround it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it is passed 11 days and it is not healed, then pause on the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is necessary in your own capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterization for a fistula which some of the first ones said: take the location of the fistula and fill it with that and pause in that fissure, just as subtle as its shape is. Pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and apply your hand with care with good retention, so that the patient is not hurt by the melted lead not reaching the head of him; and take care to pause on the head of the patient with a cloth wrapped in alum or water, because the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and healing, it is well; and otherwise, then it is necessary to administer a thrust of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterization of the Wound of the Lips.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times these fissures occur on the lips, and mostly on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure these fissures with the water that we have said in the divisions and it does not improve your cure, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this shape which is seen:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the curvature of it according to the subtlety of a knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then pause that initial cut cautiously in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with cerotes until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess develops in the uvula or palate or in the roots of the teeth and bursts, and then becomes old and forms a fistula, and you cure that but it doesn't improve, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity received by the fistula, and apply that ignited thing into the track of the fistula, and take your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end do it once or twice; and then cure that with the water that we have said about healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the pus is discharged and is healed, it is well; and otherwise, then it is necessary to uncover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what is written in its capital.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure those with medicines but do not confirm it, then pause the patient's head in your sight, and then ignite the cautery in the shape which will be shown to you, so that you pause the quill on the tooth and insert the hot cautery into it hastefully, and take your hand a little bit until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then have the patient open his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, and then stop it, because the decayed tooth is sealed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-First Chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is a worm or frost in it, or if the cure with medicine does not confirm, then use two methods of cauterization: either with the border of cows, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauteri am boder is when you take the border of cows and boil it in copper, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the tent, and then immerse that in boiling border, and pause that on the painful tooth hastefully until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then iterate that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge cloth or cotton in the boiling border as said above, and pause that on the painful tooth, and pause over that hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But in any case, the cauterization with fire is that you attend to the quill of iron or copper, and it be in the heart of it some roughness, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the shape which will be shown, and pause that on the tooth and take your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times until the pain is relented or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that through the impression of that cautery, the patient fills his mouth with good border and keeps it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you wish, at the extremity, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the quill:
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Extrophuli.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophuli are full of flesh and cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines, and you wish to facilitate their digestion lightly, then you ignite the cautery in a curved shape as follows, having two extremities with humps so that the smoke from the cautery rises from one extremity, and pause that hot thing on the abscess once or twice, or if needed more times, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days and pause over that cloth wrapped in border until what the fire has burned away is renewed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment and tents and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the quill or cautery is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Twenty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Hoarseness and Constriction of the Throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come out on the throat of the lung, and mostly when this is due to coldness of congestion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that at the root of the goiter in the depremented location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not reach the goiter with the cautery nor burn away its code, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it be claw-like, following the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with water which is preceded by it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors and the patient does not have fever or phlegm, but is an old illness, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the depremented locations, one above and one below; and with another cautery in the middle location of the feet between two mamillae; and let the cautery be claw-like according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, then be your cauterization punciform with the cauteries that are called puncta, in the shape which precedes in the puncturing of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And be points inserted into those, and then cure that with water which is preceded by it until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already the cauteries have three humps where cauterization is done with that: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Cauterization of Titillation which is the head of the Help.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the Help is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not remain fixed in its return moment, and then for a small movement it becomes dislocated again, just as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first, and then the patient should be returned to their original position or onto their right or left side; and then elevate the code which is in the posterior part of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand if the juncture is dislocated towards the back.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the code so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be like this: with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so those subtleties according to the quantity of tent; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some times it is adjusted according to this count, and because there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cautery with porous citruses and salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be decayed for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and tartness is made there, then it is necessary to cauterize on the muscle with claw-like cautery or with pointed puncture cauteries, because the juncture is confirmed and the moisture is dried up and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold humors come out in the stomach and many moistures are multiplied there, and if you continue the methods of healing and do not confirm it, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their legs extended and their clothes loosened, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one leaving a space for the foot as long as the width of a finger with claw-like cautery, and two cauteries leaving the sides of the stomach, so that the figure of triangular cauterization is formed; and elongate between them so that they do not intersect and cause pressure.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the code.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery will be according to this form, with addition, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and that will be one cautery according to the shape of a circle, according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And then cauterize the stomach punctiform to that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sense on the stomach point by point according to what you wish with tent, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the healing which precedes it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Cauterization of the Frozen Feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or moisture or excessive ventilation so that it departs from its normal state by excessive excretion, and the patient is not cured with the water which we have said, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their head elevated, and sense three cauteries according to this form and this quantity mixed with tent, and place them on the foot left of the hip bones, where the man's position lies.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be placed according to the length of the right arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your hand with the moving cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the maturity of the codena, and not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then lie down, which has already stretched out its clothes, and elevate its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize those cauteries with a cutlery-like cautery, when it is according to your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the code be absorbed so that it is absorbed into the whole body and reaches within the veins, for the code here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Perforation of Abscess on the Foot with a Cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excrescence or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will have a heavy and intense pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, with great pain and at times that fatigues even the physicians with its cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back with their head elevated; and then sense the location of the abscess with tent; and then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rag, the form of which has been preceded in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize with that and cautery until all the code is burned away, until it reaches the bone, until in which you will see healing.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with the healing of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cauterization unless one has studied in the art of medicine and many diseases have been known; but rather, try it occasionally with some boldness, but always leave room for doubt, and that is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterization of Pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They will say that the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology are made for pleurisy with a coldness according to this manner, and it is this: take one root of aristology, long and dry, which is found, and be of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a small cautery in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one slightly declining towards the side below the beard, and another two cauteries declinating between the fifth rib and the navel, declining slightly behind; and another one in the middle of the foot; and another one on the stomach; and three small cauteries on the back; and one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders; and two small cauteries from both sides of the foot, leaving out the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifest of the code in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already some ancient ones have said that they are also some of the men who use a cautery made of iron similar to a ray and ignite it, and place it in that location which is between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess and is purged with pus, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for when it happens soon after it becomes a fistula which does not lead to healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Thirtieth Chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Cauterization of the Melancholy.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of melancholy with the water which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then cauterize in that place according to three ways, all of which are purgative, of which one is to make three or four lines running along the length of the melancholy, just as the figure of the cauteries on the foot has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the thickness between each cautery be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be elevated on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two wick-like ends, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the code which is in the end part of the melancholy, where the patient's left side becomes quiet.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be the one by which you elevate the code according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two wick-like ends, ignite them slowly, into that which you will pierce with the code from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three wick-like ends.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then cure the cautery more than it has already laid down of getting worse for too many days, because it is more certain that the other previous causes are in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-First Chapter.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrocephaly.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not used in hydrocephaly, but rather on the proper part alone.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrocephalus with the methods of healing which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that one cauterizes with four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the melancholy, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the subtlety of the code.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery untouched for such a time that it may become worse over a long period.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from the cure near the cautery with water which is necessary for two intentions, and be hastened to him with the help of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is claw-like according to its previous shape, and it is that with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterization of Feet and Shoes.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are abscessed in hydrophobia and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary that you cauterize the feet on the back of the heel with a cautery in nocturnal water which is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return to all, because the stagnant water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauteries on each shoe, and in each shoe make a cautery at the extremity of the claw-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be according to the length of the shoe: one at the toe and the other at the middle of the shoe; and on each shoe, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open without healing for a long time because some water will ooze out from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cauterization of the Belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is afflicted by cold and moisture so that the virtues are debilitated, it is necessary to exhibit virtue to show that the patient will suffer from a cautery. Then cauterize that with a great cautery on the patient's stomach according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circle cautery and four small cauteries in the navel subtils, with claw-like cautery subtlety; and with a cautery over the skin over the aloes grand, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidities are excessive and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that over the intestines and over the bowels, and slightly adjusting two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, because it is a perfect cure of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors or corrupted moistures come to an end, and are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confirm the patient's cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left between the vertebrae of the small back and small triangular, and with a cautery above the navel which falls by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food not digested, and their face often abscessed, then cauterize that on the stomach with a great cautery according to what has preceded; and with one cautery on the foot, and another on the melancholy of them with a claw-like cautery, and leave the cautery untouched for some time open, and then cure them until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On Cauterization of Athletes near the Abscession of Their Wounds.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess athletes, then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the abscessed athlete, and finally rest your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it once or twice, for if athletes are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and finally cure those with what confirms their wounds until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a great cautery on someone, it is more certain in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Cauterization of Fistulas that are made in the natural parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one has some fistula in the natural parts which is old and corrupt, with pus and corrupted moistures, and therefore what is most worthy that it cures is to probe that with a subtle tent, and then know the quantity of its depth with the preceding said tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the tent has penetrated.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery on that until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one, two, or three sessions, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or bowel, then beware of all those places; and do not make it so unless the fistula is in a fleshy and palpable place that is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all materials have abscessed from it, and remains thus for a long time, then know that it has been fully cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not gone from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prone position of corrupting one's flesh, or falls into those causes of which a reminder will come in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Cauterization of the Tonsils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the tonsils there is pain from cold or from excessive ventilation, and because of this the patient's throat is dry, then it is necessary that you cauterize that on the tonsils with a cautery on each tonil with a claw-like cautery of which the remembrance precedes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then cauterize with a small cautery in the second one, so that three lined-up cauteries will come to be, and therefore they will be more certain in judgment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When debilitation and mollification occur in the bladder due to cold and moistures such that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the most posterior part of the bladder, where the hairs of the intestines begin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of the bones of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the most lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a claw-like cautery according to what has been processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterization of the Shoulder.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and moistures come to the shoulder, and because of this, there is no preoccupation, and the menstrual cycles are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and it happens that pain occurs in the movement of them, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the most posterior part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be claw-like.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moistures are effused into the part of the hip, and are caused by the symptoms of the same place, and a sign of it is that the shoe is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found in the quarter where the buttock lies.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circular cautery resembling a circle, as you have marked with a tent in the circuit of the same part, and because the part falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let it be the cautery whose form preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not with you at hand, then cauterize that with three cauteries and one large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the subtlety of all the code; and then cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Forty-First Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the hip, and its cause is cold and moistures, the patient is cured with what we have said and does not confirm, and this is old, then it is necessary that you release the patient from gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in that is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two scientific methods, one of which is to cauterize that on the part of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make good depth in those.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But sometimes there are four cauteries on the middle part of the hip, so that they are on the head of the anquana.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle whose form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that it may be a circular container and burn away the subtlety of all the code.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and not extended into the coss.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the coss, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the coss on the spot where the patient feels the pain; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers a little above the hairy part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutaneous, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the subtlety of the code.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient says that the pain is extended into the place near the big toes, then cauterize that here where it hurts with a cautery for three or four points, or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient says that the pain is below the donal bone near the coss, then cauterize that here with one cutaneous cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cautery that you do not leave the cautery until you burn nerves or large arteries, and because of this, it may harm your patient more than it helps.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one or another of those which you will cauterize on the hip and ultimately in the cautery, and the inflated fire burning inside until the tumor reaches the top, and the perforated and corrupted foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And thus there will be a sudden solution of the stomach, and thus also death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And thus the wise men say in the cauterization of the hip, that this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron, the circumference being half of a palm; and let the opening be according to the thickness of an almond or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And in the center of that circle be another circle; and let the space between them be the quantity of the bones of the foot; and be those circles about two parts; and let their length be one bone or two bones, and make in those margins a decent iron clothing in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And let it be ignited in the fire until it reddens and produces sparks, and then let it rest on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that with three circular cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let that rest for three days, apply an emplaster to it with a border and leave the wound open for many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Thus says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have used but few times because of the terror of the regard for it, and therefore few of those who look upon it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of the best cauteries to that place which suffered them, and finds with it the location of the same.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the cautery with medicines that adhesions, is that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which they should be placed the guaffo of the door of iron; let the length of the walls be in the naughtiness of theirs be two bones or as many as those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each one is the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and be above and below, and be that they contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then let it rest on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side, and press your hand on the part of the hip; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually, and let it stay for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient's mordication and adjustment of it - because that atrocity is as if from fire - until the mordication ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the hot water from all of the hip with lukewarm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the adjustment is renewed, and let it rest again for some days, and flow from it purulence; this is the final in judgment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the coss or the leg, make it so in that location where it contains water according to what is done in the hip in equal measure.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of causes not extinct in both parts, one on each side, and mix them together and pause in a new bowl of which the left part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the ray.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause the bottom of one bowl in another bowl filled with lukewarm water, and pour upon that alkali and living causes of hot water which absorbs them by a finger, and then press those with your thumb for good compression, and let the hole that descends from the sharp water into the left part of the bowl filled with lukewarm water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkali renewed, for those things are now of great fiery intensity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation does by fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus of some medicines with which the hip is cauterized, such as turpentine and manna, and causes with saffron, mixed together in a way that they are blended.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts the story of a man from ancient times who underwent an operation and cure with which he was cured of hip pain and sciatic vein pain, and magnified much about that, saying that there was no need for another cure, and since he was healed in one go just as recommended, because it was very easy to do so.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And thus it is that he is pressed with a certain type of vertebra, and if not found to be green, then he is pressed with a recent fig tree; and much is mixed with a little bit of gray and is paused on the hip where there is pain, or in the coss, or in the leg, and is tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient gives up the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put it in water and thus when the body of him is reddenated, enter that into the earth, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use this cautery with these medicines except in the case of evacuation from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Escorides has said that when there is a wound in the goat's vein, it is cauterized by afflicting the moon; and let the cautery be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat's skin and inflame it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and let the cautery be done by placing the charcoal on the wool and letting it extend.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the mordication reaches into the hip and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called "cauteri de vaquas".
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Parts.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times pain is in the two parts due to numerous causes, such as by falling or striking or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, namely the infusion of wet and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And let it not be cut off except in this one species which is made by effusion of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with bitter pills and similar ones, which are made on the two parts where there is pain three lines according to their latitude, so that each line has one or more cauteries, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the remedy.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let it be a cauterization with pinpoint cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries at the medial point of the claw according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gillyosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease begins in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs on their structure in the leg, causing elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it appears in the last vertebra of the back and in the bones of the neck that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that with a cautery that is a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery on all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with pinpoint cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be proper between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure that place until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer a cautery in gilbosity that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Cauterization of Gout and Pain in Joints.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When pains in joints are caused by wet humors which are lodged in each member of the body, it is customary for doctors to call this condition gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore since gout caused by wet humors is cured with a method of cure and the pains are not renewed, then one must recauterize them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And so you cauterize that place with evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, whose form is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary that points be made on the sole of the foot, then make them with a pinpoint cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the tendons or to other joints, and many times it becomes established, then cauterize that place on each tendon with three or four cauteries of all parts with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed, as these cauteries are to you necessary, then cauterize that place and do not press too hard with the cautery before, so that it is only around the subtlety of the code.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the tendon and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its own chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the mass and is called syringa, then point in the circle of the tendons as they revolve, pointing to those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said joints, then point in the circle of the tendons on each bone and on the pinch of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise to nearby days in the hips or muscles, then cauterize all of them on all parts of the aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is made a good regimen and the flux is evacuated by this cautery, then it will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When an open wound appears in the groin and says goodbye to the navel, and this is where it begins to approach, then you must tell the patient to stop eating for a day and to use soothing causes so that the wound will descend from its belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their arm bent until there is a hole or the cord or the bag appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that place with your said fingers and signal the rupture over the bone of the shoulder blade, signaling the extremity of which is similar to the middle of a circle on the divided parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery which has this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is but a small spark and gives out sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the bag or cord to its natural size, and then place your hand on the location so that the bag does not burst.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have placed between the patient's cosses and left one there to rest, another serves on his legs, and another on his feet, which has its own masses.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then pause the cautery on that signal with your hand holding the cautery straight, and place it there until you reach the bone of the shoulder blade in the middle of the dueduni; and repeat that procedure another time if you did not achieve it in the first instance into the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the shape of the bag at the time of your cautery, lest you burn that bag and the patient comes to harm or great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you are applying the cautery do not touch the bone, nor compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their age and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then cure the location of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar of fire is renewed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lies on their back for 40 days until the wound and the plague are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary that you pause the patient's nourishment according to the length of time of their cure, which stretches their belly, and that the bag does not burst forth from the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, after 40 days, gradually administer a decrease in the remedy, and keep it thus for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And thus be reduced in work and replenishment of food and drink, and in violent voices, because when you use this regimen of entire healing, it will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say the cure for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and thus at first, and you wish not to delay, then cauterize the rupture with that redon-shaped cautery according to its quantity, and it is this which is exhorted from the code just as the third part of it; and then cure that place with what we have said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And it has already been said by some firsts that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signaled in the attempt:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that goes through the latitude in the hip above the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On Cauterization of Twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When an injury occurs in some member by falling or striking and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to cure with medicines, then it is necessary that you cauterize with pinpoint cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And it is the cautery of each member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and revelation, location of twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good is; and otherwise, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary with those pains to be punctured in the member that approaches the one, so that you must achieve those with cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The lepers sometimes require cauterization for a great benefit, and more so if the species of leprosy is made by the putridity of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that place, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor stopped, and fear for the patient that corruption will encompass all of their body and all its composition, then cauterize it on the head with seven cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, and the second a little behind, up to the forehead; and two on each earlobe; and one behind, on the back of the neck or the nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little bit until it presses on the bone and leaves a small impression, and from there the scabs are dislodged, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from them; and cauterize over the swelling according to what has been said.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize that place with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with one cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on both elbow joints, and two on both vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one great one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx itself, and two on each hip joint, and one on each hip, and two on each ankle, and one on each toe, and two on each calf, and one on each muscle, and two on each tendons of the legs; and cauterize that place on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the tendons of their arms.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are on the ankle, lest you burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the shoulder blade and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and conformable it is; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, just as they do in their own flesh, because their body has already been stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as is preceded by the species of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with flour of earthworms mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is stuporized or drowsy and is cured with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healed, then you must cauterize that member with cauteries according to its magnitude or smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And your cautery should enter the subtlety of the code a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with remedies until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and in the vertebrae of the back, and the tension of the nerves which govern that member is released, and the stupor is renewed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On Cauterization of Moles that are Morfæa.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When moles are old and do not yield to any of the remedies of medicine, then you must cauterize over them with a preon-shaped cautery a little bit according to the quantity of the subtlety of the code, until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color of it is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with flour of earthworms and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of pigeon or the blood of swallow, each being one part and all being mixed together; and apply a cloth and place it on the location until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On Cauterization of Crabs.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to cut it out, then cauterize that place with a circle-shaped cautery in the circuit of it just as it revolves.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me, I have not seen this, for I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized in the circuit of it with a circle just as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On Cauterization of Adulterations.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adulterations are delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to the superfluity making it so, or because of the condition of the patient, which is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of adulterations; then cauterize in the circuit of it with many small punctate cauteries; and then let that be as it will mature in its proper time.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and place that in the middle location of the adulterations until the code pierces.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied in that location which is more behind, because the body of the arm is relieved; and then cure that place until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization of Corrosions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is corruption that walks in the member, which corrupts it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosion in a location where it is suitable for cautery with fire, then ignite small to great number of claw-shaped cauteries, and apply them according to what is convenient in that location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that place entirely until you eradicate all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave that place alone for three days, and pause over the locations that have been cauterized with a mixture of oil and soap until all the scars are eradicated and all corruption is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy and there is no corruption in it, good is; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with some sharp medicines, because it is a halfway point between cautery and medicine.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, cautery by fire is of greater benefit.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure with sharp medicine in the division; therefore take it when you have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Knots and other Similarities.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times there is a growth in the leftover parts of the foot that is called a knot, and it is a big, deep cause which lames the foot; and cautery is done on those according to two methods, that is, with fire and with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But the cautery with fire is when you ignite the concave-like cauteri resembling a small wheel, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the knot of all parts, and it should be of fine margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause that which is ignited over the knot, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the knot until the cautery reaches the depth of the knot.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then leave that place alone for three days until the knot begins to fall off.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that place with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on that place for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times it occurs on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and legs, then you must administer cauterization with water, and this is done by taking a hollow reed or iron rod or a wheel-shaped piece, and placing that on the knot; and then take a small quantity of hot water, and pour it into the canula, and hold your hand, and revolve that with compression of your hand all over, so that the margin of the canula is pressed against the root of the knot, and let the hot water flow back through the reed to the root of the cau; and wait for the patient a little while for the mordicating effect of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, because the knot with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do this to those and the other one until you come to all of them on whose body it is.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those places where the roots of the knots are eradicated with this water of remedies which causes flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to fright in the nerves or due to fever caused by fright, or for another similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize that place with four or five cauteries placed between each vertebra of the back; and with one cautery on the legs and over the stomach of the patient, with an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor ceases and hastens the recovery of the patient from the frightful illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On Cauterization of Accidental White Spots on the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white spots are formed on the body and pustules burst open which are made of thick corrupted matter; therefore it is necessary at first as it appears, that a subtle cautery be applied to the head of the fistula with a myrtle-shaped cauteri whose end is extended in fire; or with the roots of long-lasting erestology; or with a lentecular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and do not believe, and the superfluity making those things ceases, and cures those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however, it is necessary that this be done properly with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding due to Incision of Artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times there is bleeding from an artery which is cut by the wound or by the incision of apostemes or cauteries on the member, and then similar things happen, and it is difficult to stop that bleeding.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, as it happens with some water, then you must take your hand to the orifice of the artery and place on that the said cauteri, and apply it many times until the bleeding stops and there is no more.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause in the fire with small and large olive-shaped cauteries, by number of points, and blow over them until they are thoroughly ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or one large cautery from those, according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, and place it on that vein hastening more than you have previously applied the said cautery, until the bleeding is stopped and contained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the said cautery and extinguish it, then take another cautery carefully from among the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that you bring other evil upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: or with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of it are burned and the bleeding is stopped, or that it be tied with thread or ligament by strong constriction, or that medicines which have the virtue of restricting blood flow be applied to it; and they must be strengthened with a poultice and decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers restraint by way of ligament and constriction with cloths or by position of causes that burn and similar things does not yield quickly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens in some place and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work with a pause of the said cautery on the orifice of that vein just as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the bleeding stops from the highest part of the wound, and over the artery let it not be removed; and on the artery be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and further in what has to do with cauteri or medicine needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Incision, Perforation, Ventoses, Phlebotomy, Wounds and their Similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is suitable and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those things in the forms of cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters of the subordination of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter by that same manner, so that it may be helpful to the one seeking it, namely on what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, it is necessary, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is about terror, which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore it is necessary that there be great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs, which is with blood, and to which life belongs, and so the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the apostema or warning of existence or purification of the wound or extraction of splinter or incision of peyra and their similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And among all those, there is accompanied fear and trembling, and in most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And you are warned that this should not fall on you, because sometimes the case requires the methods of men with many diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them flee from their disease and it is light for them to die, and thus because of the vehemence of this that they find in their disease, and due to the length of their illness, and with the disease there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And one of them is the one who gives you their property and wealth, while you are expecting their health, and their disease is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to him who comes to you with this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any cause about this without proper certain science which verifies what you are, and by which you will have a praiseworthy succession.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your diseases prognosis and indication from that which is converted to health, for in that is aid to you on acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires his understanding in you and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have arranged this chapter distinct by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be helpful to you in what you request and need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter I.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water which is contained in the Head of Children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs in children, especially during childbirth, when the midwife tightens the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this disease except in children; and all those whom I have seen have been brought to the point of death, and thus it has been shown to me as a work that is left undone in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water overflowed, and the head of him was always thus magnificently swollen to the point where it could not be contained on its own, but rather increased in moisture until it became hot death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the vertebrae and the bone, or accumulates behind the bone above the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case if the moisture is between the vertebrae and the bone and the apostema is slight, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be two nights so that the moisture may flow, and this is the form of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the moisture is further increased and the apostema is greater, then there are two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is behind the bone, then the sign of it is that you should cut open the commissures of the head from all sides and the water will be squeezed out when you compress that with your hand on the parts inside and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then apply the incision and extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the incisions with cloths and poultices; and then envelop this in a wrapping of vinegar and oil for five days, and then release the ligament and cure the wound with tentas and enguentz, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of incision, which you should consider according to the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the replenishment of water, and make it so that it is most suitable for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you should not incise the artery and thereby cause bleeding of blood, and let the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the Incision of the Arteries which are near the Ears, called Hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter III.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When it happens to some that they have catarrhs or wounds in the eyes or feet, and this is old-fashioned, and does not conform with the cure of medicines, then the final cure in this case is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's head swells, and then gently rub the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulsates; and the locations of each over the locations which are near the ears, repressed, and only in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then sign on the artery with a tentacle, and then incise each one with the spatula of each side approaching to the bone, and be it so for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, enter the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incisions on each side.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And be the length of the incision about two inches adjusted, for when some vein is incised, the blood flows out with pulsatile egression, which jumps forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary for you to measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then sign with a tentacle, and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And as much blood as is needed to be gotten is one vessel's worth of blood. and not too little or too much is gotten from the patient, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the replenishment of the artery in him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if some cause of the spine remains on the bone, then incise this so that it does not develop into a painful apostema.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and ligatures of linen cloth, and then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When to some it happens that ancient emigration or sharp catarrh occurs, due to humid and grueling conditions in the temples, or old-fashioned violent symptoms similar to those, and is medicated with the methods of medicinal cure, but this does not conform, then we have resolved to extract the arteries in the temples, or cauterize them thus as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shows the arteries which are in the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most men except for a few due to the vehemence of the friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then gently rub the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with warm water until the artery becomes manifest to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then gently scrape the vertebra with that spatula with ease until you reach the artery; and then get into it and extract that part above all, and extract it from the vertebra and uncover those tunics which are below it, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it around with the extremity of the onyx, and then incise one part of that according to the quantity by which its extremities are lengthened and contracted, and do not allow a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one vessel's worth of blood. into three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary for you to ligate that in two places with a double knot of thread or with cords as long, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and prevent blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligatures; and do this at that hour or at another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone and with a cauterizer in the shape of a knife, so that the extremities are incised, and remain in its place as an intermediate work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of scalded complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that helps to finish off the humidities, and therefore it is better in judgment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to carefully extract the arteries that fill up the old cut, and let them be placed on the polyps decently made, and then let it be cured with dry medicines making the flesh appear and with some ointment until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working on another occasion there occurs a flow of blood from the artery, then immediately grasp to stop that blood, or with cauterization, or by filling up the old cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of these causes is not present to you, then pause your hand on the location until the blood is congealed, and envelop the location with warm water of fervent heat so that the sharpness may rest, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two blades, because you have marked the two locations with a tentacle, and then lay each one aside, entirely extinguished, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between its extremities may be lengthened, for it is not completely consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it has less sharpness than two blades, then it is better, for if it is as sharp as two blades near each other, and does not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since in those there is some thickness, it is held that the heat of the fire is kept in them and the flesh is cut away slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and easier to accomplish.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two blades should be equal to the thickness of the said digit.
Capitol quart.	Chapter IV.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Cure of Corrupted Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears from the Ears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acid tears, and the eyes of those veins which are above the forehead of the head protrude forth, and do not conform to any cause of medicinal cure, and the face of the patient is already inflamed and feels in its own forehead a wandering like that of ants, and the ears of that person are exhausted, moistened and worn out as if their skin was condensed, and the eyelids are scarred by the sharpness of the tears, those ancient agrumists mixed in the cure of these with this operation, and called it "spassa" curation.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to tear off the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise three fissures equally distant along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little finger movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is equal to three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge apparatus or dry cloths, moistened and saturated with which the blood is absorbed.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the side of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape away with that all the cord which is between two incisions on the spine which is above the bone, and then make this move of the incision to migrate into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then place this spatula aside and insert another instrument called "cutellar", sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the blade of that cutellar so as to cut through the flesh attached to the cord, and the blade of it cuts down into the bone, and push that forward until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the ears.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and then make this move in the middle fissure into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since there is a quantity of blood that has coagulated, express the places of the pessaries where the blood has been collected.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause in each fissure the old cut and pause over those polyps begotten in wine and oil and vinegar, and be careful that it does not develop into a painful apostema.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day release the ligature and administer great enthusiasm of warm water or tub, and then cure it with ointment made from basilikon oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Cure of Lagrams by Catarrh and to the Ears, which descend from the parts behind the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there occurs in some patient sharp and continuous catarrh, and the ears of that person are exhausted and small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their skin peeled away, and in the forehead of the head there is acute pain leading to exhaustion, then it is necessary to understand by these accidents that the matters and catarrh do not come from only a few veins but from many parts behind proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and then incise a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little bit for the latitude (and start with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be the incision into the bone; and stretch your hand over the eyelids of the temples which are above the mastigatio), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill it between the two lips of the fissure with old cut or dry cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen above on those polyps begotten in wine and oil, so that it does not develop into a painful apostema.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have removed that and see that the apostema has decreased, then it is necessary to rub the bone until it begins to produce flesh, and then cure it with an emollient regimen which makes the flesh appear, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from it make a poultice and administer it in these wounds for the nativity of flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Cure of that which catarrhous in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that occur in the ears are one of four species, because either it is mineral or something similar to mineral, like iron and copper, or it is from plants, such as cheese or fava, or it is a fluid cause, like water and vinegar and their semblances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when mineral or some similar cause occurs in the ear that does not adjust or believe in the ear, and pauses the ear at the sun, and if the mineral is sometimes present, it is necessary to distill in that certain causes of oil of vitriol or sassafras, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stornudation in conditions, and open the nostrils before the event of stornutiation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then pause in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many times it is forgotten about these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if not, then administer the extraction with the instrument called "gesti epicicarios" which is subtle and has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten about the "gesti", then so be it; and otherwise, then administer the extraction with the onyx of subtle duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if not forgotten about this, then make a tube of iron and insert the tip of the tube into the hole of the ear and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube is free.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with great force of attraction, because many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if not forgotten in this manner, then take of holly lit or of prepared wax with which the birds are caught, and put that into the tip of the ray, and then wrap around it decently paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry out the ear from its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if not forgotten about all the causes which we have recounted, then you should beware of cutting it before it develops into a painful apostema or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you first anoint the patient with the sap of the vena sephasica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cease between your hands and convert the ear into the upper parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear above the grey hair.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the fissure should be of lunar shape until it reaches the peyra, and when the peyra is darkened, stop that if possible with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause occurs in the ear is one of the fat that creases and is inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if not obedient to your sight, then you take a spatula of fine iron according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the removal of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And don't do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many pieces, and then extract from those with onyx or with subtle instruments, or with incision as we have said, because it is facilitated the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which is entered into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutation in conditions at first, and fill his own ear with some old cut, and then pour oil over that ear where the water is, and if forgotten about this, so be it; otherwise, take many iron pears and lemons according to the length of the finger, and heat those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of his own ear and sits on top of it with another pear over the pear which is behind the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease this process until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take of paper or of cotton, etc., and place one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end to the fire until the middle part of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another cotton and make it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and stretch that with a tube just as described above about the extracting pear.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beasts that enter into that ear, if it is small-sized, just like a little one and similar to it, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is from great-sized, which appears on the side of the swelling, then administer the extraction with instruments and onyx, and the cause of it is more easily removed than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you cure it with that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and do not conform your treatment, then it is necessary to look at the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with instruments or subtle onyx; but if no cause appears, then take a tube made of stretched and widened material, the form of which is this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and then suck it out with strong suction, and make it many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if not obedient to your sight, then you open and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and find it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the form of which is this:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of lead, stretched, in which there is a small hole, and with a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it will be like as we have impelled that which is in the continuity of the tube, here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of it decently cut, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the tube -- and that is in the ear --, and then insert the ray with a cut above and compress it with your hand gently so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil outside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear is already scorched with fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you will distill in the ear is not too hot, because the medicines of the ear cannot withstand this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Ear Blockage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born with blocked ears from their mothers' unperforated vents, and this also happens to some men, blockage in the ear canal due to injury or flesh not perforated in that; and sometimes this blockage occurs in the prominence of the nose of the ear which does not consent to the swelling, and sometimes it is outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the prominence of it, which does not understand the swelling, is in the greatest difficulties of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can understand the swelling, it is necessary to pause the ear of the patient at the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if there appears obvious swelling, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which there is a small latitude, where one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula has two lion-like edges so that it does not cause damage to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the blockage is due to flesh born in the ear or in the canal of it, then take that with subtle onyx and cut that away with vehement facility until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is in the prominence of the ear, then take a subtle iron rod and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the canal of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you have felt obstruction with that which the patient has obtained with facility, due to gravity of air, force the oppression of it with facility; and beware that you do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the ear with cloth of lead according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have wrapped around it in Egyptian ointment; and make this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some powder and mix it with water and sprinkle it on top, and use it; and if the ear is already inflamed, then it is necessary to remove the powder and replace it with another powder which you wrapped around it in rose oil, so that the inflammation subsides; and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then submerge the sponge or cloth in hot water and pause it over the ear, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Athazel Which Occurs to the Eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazels which occur on the eyelids of humans sometimes are humid, and at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is necessary to take those with tentacles or onyx, and cut them with an instrument of their own roots, and then pause over the places as described.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain accompanied by a flow of blood occurs, then you should cauterize those with a lunar cautery instrument.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to do it around the incisions and many times return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the Cure of Grandeyss Which Occur on the Eyelids of Humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it occurs on the eyelids of humans some cause which is assembled to grandess in its strength and hardness, and because of that grandess it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of great moisture above and below the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider whether the grandess is proceeding from it in what appears to be the eyelid and is spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision in it with a fissure by latitude, and then carefully examine all parts with facility until it is evacuated; and then suspend it with onyx and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not accustomed to making the incision of it, nor can you penetrate the eyelid with an instrument little by little, then there is no cause noted.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not suffer harm from that because the ointment of it restores that and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandess is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid you must remove the surface outwardly; then and there ease the eyelid and suspend the grandess with onyx, unless you are accustomed to incision, and press it all around; and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, there is no cause noted.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then wash your hands with salted water; and cure the place with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the Cure of Axirnah in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnah is a grayish growth which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and most often occurs in children, causing their eyes to become inflamed and leading to their cataracts being affected; and they are not able to gaze at the brightness of the sun because tears flow into them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you should wet those eyes constantly on their faces, and they sleep on their faces; so that the eyelids of theirs below are covered with humidified swelling, which has already been inflamed, and there is apparent danger of cataract in the eye; and when you press the place with those fingers you said, you will bring about healing within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in him who makes the patient put his head into a circle made from cloth and lead, and then puts on a mixture of lead and oil, and makes a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach of all parts; and then puts that on top and presses with those fingers you said of all parts so that it is aggregated arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then ends in the middle of that humid atmosphere with an instrument incised by a fissure for latitude, and the fissure should not be greater than the one made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the prominence it is necessary that you open the code entirely until you reach arcernach, for in the most suitable procedures arcernach is processed by fissure according to the form of white gersa.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the fingers of yours in the outer parts and revolve between your right and left hands until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the instrument you may not reach the eye and it will be lost.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if there is no arthernach in the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust slightly in the fissure with facility until arthernach processes; and then extract that as we have said; and then submerge cloths of lead in water and vinegar, and make them wet and pause them over the place and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus, some that are left over from that humidity pause in the cavity of the fissure for this reason.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there occurs an inflamed apostema in the place, then cure that with ointments which subside until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On Methods of Palpation of the Eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of humans there are born natural folds and they become ancient, then those no longer belong to the eye and cause ways of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and skin until it is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called palpation of the eye, and cure itself in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made to be palpated by incision and suture; or by canals according to what I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is necessary that you put the patient's head in the said circle; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, good is; and otherwise, insert a needle into that part which is faithful to the outermost side of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate from above, and thus it will be — close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — close to the hairs, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn that with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then end in the outermost part of the eyelid below the hairs, adjusted with an instrument incised by the lacrimal major into the lacrimal duct; and then extract the thread and pause below the eyelid with small powders of coton or cloth, and then sign above the eyelid with a tent, and it should be as follows: like the figure of myrtle foliage.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is already diversified in men, for some of them require that a great quantity of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then end with the instrument on two lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is as wide as the natural folds of hair, like the thickness of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put the onyx in one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that entire area, and then adjust with the suture the two lips to the palate or thread of fine wool, and wash away the blood, and make adhere that which superfluously remains from the threads over two eyelids with some causes visible, if you wish to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the suture of the threads within three or four days, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without suture, and cure that with that which dries up and constrains, for the eyelid is raised above the sealing of the wound and the aggregation of pus; but suture is better. And thus I say to those who are accustomed to taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But however, in this there is solicitude for the patient, and it is of good operation, and not from fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you sign on the eyelid a figure like myrtle foliage, and then raise the eyelid with three separated and gathered threads according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to take the threads, and it is not equalized, then take one needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the lacrimal major, and the second thread near the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the fingers you said the threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with elevation equal to it, elevate the entire code over which is signed as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there occurs an inflamed apostema due to your incision or your fissure, soothe that apostema with cerote and similar substances, and with gentle remedies.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the eyelid is converted into hair, then it is necessary that you use in that what we have said about incision; but suture is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Taxanir by canals is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and then, by art, make two canals or two thin tubes of which the length is according to the length of the palpebra and the latitude of them is less than the latitude of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then add each one with subtlety above that which superfluously remains of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each part with very strict constriction, and leave it for a few days, for the code will die and become denuded and will be absorbed into the skin within which it has fallen.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break the thread and leave the torn parts, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and have the quantity of length and latitude neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On Elevation of Pricking Hairs in the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard, and rough, and prick the eyes, then the operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and pause it in that thread of silk or linen, and then adjust the extremities of it and note each one in a manner very subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then compose another fine thread below it in brief, and join the extremities of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in the said circle, and be near the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair adjusted to which it is necessary for engineering, and make that penetrate the eyelid promptly until you extract it above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull out the hair above and insert that into alignment, and be the hairs one or two or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull out your hand with that until the hair is outside and aligned in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out of alignment and the hair is not expelled, then pull out the alignment to the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is aligned with the above the surface.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then gaze at that with the vision of the eye, for then you will pull out the alignment and the thread, and grind all and clean the eye, and leave the closure for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on top of it good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then you adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it is raised with that, or let it rest until it is lengthened to some space, and then you raise that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure for Pterygium which appears on the Eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When pterygium appears on the eye, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this pterygium either is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterization, or by resemblance to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this case is that you cut through the consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where there is a gap between them of cloth or linen, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not good that you use any cure for it from the causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do so, it will return to pterygium even worse than before at no time whatsoever.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in it causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and mix with the water in which are cooked almonds and sesame seeds of linen or aquilon ointment, which is liquefied with some oils, and immerse in that the cloth, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate all that is not consolidated according to the form in which it began.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is only some correction of pterygium that does not return to the form of the place according to what was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure for Pterygium which is made in the Eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This pterygium which is made in the eyelid below, which is truly called alxacrati; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by wound or section or cauterization or other such things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a spatula wide.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is good, it is well; and otherwise, take a thread and pause it in the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close both incisions on the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of both incisions be at two angles of the incision which you have made until they converge, and be of their own making angle, so that when they come together it forms a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then secure the flesh with that quantity which is the edge of the lower eyelid, so that it secures the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then cure those with what we have said of softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if pterygium develops through incision or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid according to what has been previously said.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with a poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of pterygium when it is above or below, that which runs in this operation, according to what is prepared from the form of pterygium, and that is in the form of various moles.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans prepare with art in every manner that is possible to it, so as to return the figure to its natural form, or nearly so, and that sick person according to what is suitable for the operation and instruments in the greatest preparations.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs to many men, it is solidified above the eyelid as a white album of the eye, and prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and raise it up or extend it with an instrument.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a spatula subtle, which is not sharp like the cuts, having obtuse a small part so that the patient is not troubled by the operation, and leave the spatula that does not touch the eye with its subtlety.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be what loosens that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash; or distill in it of unicorn's horn dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and place it on the eye lanolin infused in albumen of egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the Incision of the Eyelid and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimal.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard, thin cipha; or it is non-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when touched by iron, or is forced to take an ointment, is abscised and the ointment does not stick in place.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, and then gradually cover the vision and prohibit light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in this incision is that the patient puts their head in the said circle, and then opens the eyes of it, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the eyelid with an ointment of some duplication and extends that to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and introduce into it a piece of horse or ox or cow hair, or similar, or strong thread, or duplicate the extremity of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie with thread the eyelid; and extend it to the upper parts, and cut away from the hair the edge of the eyelid which touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that with the hair until the end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal with a spatula subtle or small forceps, and free the natural flesh of the lacrimal so that by this incision there is not continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the eyelid with extended or tied onic is thus as we have said, and then it should be excised with a lion spatula of which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture in it, and that the pupil is pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision is made in the eye with a small amount of finely ground salt or a piece of cypress wood dyed with senna, and let that remain until the next day; and then cure that with what is needed until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is the ointment fixed in it, then many times this species of eyelid is cured with medicines, and is healed just as we have said and recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you will operate on the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula with acute precision according to this form:
am subtilitat.	...with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if at times it is rarefied and is congealed and presses into that root, then you must distill from your hand in the eye of cypress wood dyed with senna or with rose or with finely ground salt, and anoint the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over that the operation until all that is of it is remade, unless a contrary apostema is caught in the eye, for then you must leave it alone and cure the apostema at first until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye with great harm, should be suspended with an ointment; and incise that part, and do not leave off the incision lest continuous flow of tears ensue.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the lacrimal eye with rose and senna, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the Incision of Albuginea and the Water that is born from Adjusted Flesh in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some there is born red flesh, and it is overlaid until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts above and is assembled like a rose lattice.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this case is that the patient puts their head in the said circle; and then opens the eyes of that and collects all that red flesh with ointments suitable to it, and takes it away with a forceps or a basket; and then incises the flesh at first until all is finished by the instrument, and beware of the eye that you do not touch that which may spoil your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the eyelid, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to what will come of its form approaching this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that red flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with finely ground salt, or distill into it a red powder and similar to it the medicines corrosive, and place on top of the eye a covering of albumen of egg until you are assured that there will be no apostema.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of albuginea and it is severely inflamed, and you fear apostema, then leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with what is needed to remove that apostema, and then iterate over that with an operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But first of all you must alienate all cure from the eye by natural or accidental means, act with iron, and not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Scales which come forth red and rough, which are thrust out on the eye and prohibit the sight its operation, and develop the eye in length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which scales are present is strong and there is no other disease besides scales, then you will collect those scales.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to put their head in the said circle, and then suspend those veins with one ointment or two according to your prudence; and be that ointment of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	...or two ointments gradually in one mass according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then be those veins collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye and turned around.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not touch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is done in the midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you incise only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you must distill into the eye cypress green or red to such sharpness that it corrodes away the water that is removed from the scales.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect all at that hour, then gather all the water that flows from the pain in that eye and leave it alone for some days until the pain subsides and there is no fear of apostema.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the Reduction of Rhinitis to the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arisati with cauterization or acute medicine, and it is not preceded by the narrative of it and does not heal, then do not intervene in it except to open up a fissure on the apostema until it reaches maturity, and extract all the humidity that is in it and dry it out so that the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is revealed and times in it corruption or blackness, then you must scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the "aspre cap", and it is made of iron indistinctly, and it is a redon head like that which is made pointed by lime punctation or aliskalfatization by subtle point (like it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And then place that on the corrupted part of the bone, and gently revolve it between the said points, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then make it some times, and afterwards restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is consolidated and good flesh is born in it, and the body of the pus is cut off and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed and not apostematized and there is no accident, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then do not intervene in it except to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take three threads according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it first attenuated to the end so that it is like many times.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and be it close to the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the eye, and then revolve your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by means of which it is so when you take away your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines in such a way that it is as if they had been applied.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh is gone and the place is hardened, then the material which was flowing to the parts above returns to the nose, therefore that is easier on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no harm or diminution in the operation, then you must loosen the patient, and then follow it, and then pause for breathing in the neck without scarification and sucking for good suction; and then pause on the eye a liniment which is made of atrament and aloe and gall and sarsaparilla, and then strengthen the plaster on the eye with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths from lions many times, and each cloth be folded into four pieces; and make powder of those.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then pause those one upon another according to the quantity that the eye needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen on those with a durable cloth and a strong binding; and iterate the suction without scarification; and then stop the suction and leave the eye straight for a day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligature is relaxed, then it is necessary to make it very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then stop the ligature about day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the eye is already reduced, that's good; and otherwise, then iterate the plaster with powders, binding, and suction until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Eminence of the Tunic Uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunic uvea, and it protrudes and proceeds outside of the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and its shape resembles that of a man by virtue of this, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recounted, which is that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left above and the part below, and then place another needle in the double thread of the part of the lacrimal, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and pause on the eye with wool infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls away from the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the eye with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all around with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted eminent grandness, and then be perforated by the subtle spatula that comes to the front of the eye, and flow out the albuginean humidity, and descend the eye and enter it soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Cure of Alconati.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconati is nothing but a pus that is situated in the eye, resembling descending water and not being that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of acting on it is that you make the patient sit on a well-appointed and straight chair, and then take your own head in two parts and place that in such a way that you see the pus reaching the parts above, and then be dried and not descend, and stop the light, and the patient sees the causes as he would.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the preparation for the descent of the pus is not done with the water as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and find it on the panniculus cerning a little bit from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (into the place that you will see), until the pus is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is forgotten, then you must distill into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured by other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Cure of the Water Descending from the Eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the kinds of water in the division and which is suitable for piercing as we declare in sermon, then that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and bind their own eye tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause on the side of the patient's eye with your left hand if their eye is the left one; or with your right hand if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take alumina if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause the extremity of alumina close to the crown by the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and then impale alumina with virtue and revolve your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that alumina has already reached the seen cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measure of the path of alumina to the front be equal to the measure of space which is the diameter of the pupil from the beginning of darkness to the end of blackness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil by the vision of the eye through the clarity of the tunic cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause alumina in the location where the water is, and then you attract it down once or twice, and thus if the water descends soon, then behold the patient with that on which their vision will soon be, and alumina in its own eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; thus if the water has descended, then you should place that other time ahead of alumina before it is dropped.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried and does not descend, you should extract alumina with ease, and revolve with it your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear gemstone salt and mix it with that to wash the eye outward; and then pause outside the eye with a cotton or stopper or wool infused in rose oil and albumen of egg white, and bind the eye tightly.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time pause over that which is torn apart with albumen of egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your alumina at the instrument of the eye by its hardness - for it is one of those men whose eye is very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called "alberid" and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then perforate with that the conjuncture, and do not stop your hand in the hole, and do not be if it is not that you make a way to alumina's subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce alumina according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete the complement of your work, be prepared for the patient's sleep descent made in which they will sleep on their back in a dark room, and be forbidden from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of it so that its nature is linked, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the bandage according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that in the dark and expose the fresh vision, and make it see some causes, and then return the bandage within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do that at the time of the cure or soon after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They had need that you avoid this because the water flows more lightly by great and vehement regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an apostema occurs cautiously, then you must remove the eye before the 7th day, and correct it with water that flows out of the apostema.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you will absolve the vision of it and pause on the face of it orally for which the moment is regulated by it for some days, existing in the darkest darkness.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then be taken away from that great darkness and converted into its own causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy there is no excuse for the disciple's vision a few times, and then you will be brave on the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already been reported to us by some of those who are in the Artach, and one said that fire is made in the Ayrac Magdalen, perforated at which the water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But meanwhile you have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected water, nor do you read about it in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Magdalen by which one may be above those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of earth properly, and they are the extremities of their own with this subtlety triangular, the sharp end just like that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Cure of Flesh Rot in the Nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are born various flesh rottings, some of which are caused by some cause resembling that of scorpio's weight or polyp's disease; and this illness is called polyps because it resembles that represented by pey.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And in it are cancerous flesh, pale and of a dark color; and in it is that which is not flesh like a lion's color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is not flesh like a lion's color, and is not cancerous or fraudulent, you must make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and anoint the nose with it, and prick once in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the outer parts, and then incise with that which you have comprehended from those with a sharp and subtle spatula, one part to the other, until you know that all the flesh is gone; for if there remains any cause by which it can be abscised, then you must ratify that with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if the wound begins to bleed or an apostema occurs cautiously, then you must pause at that which is necessary; or it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the bleeding stops and all the cavities are gone.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then be taken away from the nose with an incision, so that the water or wine may flow in.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is swollen and there is moisture proceeding into the palate, then you will know that it has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is flesh rot in the bones of the nose to which abscission has not been obtained.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then it is necessary that you introduce the thread of lead to which there is some thickness, and thrust it into the bone with great force, and pause between each thrust the quantity of said or less, and engender the illness and introduce one extremity of the thread into the nose by means of a ray or another cause which is possible for it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, then attract the thread of lead into the nose so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let it be situated on the upper part of the nose, because many times the children at school make a similar action, and it is a light cause for one who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that goes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a serration of flesh with the needles that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already sewn with the needles of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the thread, and pause in the nose near the abstraction of blood for a day or two, and do this for three days or more until the scabbed flesh is all gone from the bones.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the nose with a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you find that the cure does not exist, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument, the cupping vessel maker, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or earth, which resembles a small open lamp, like a small conch shell, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the cupping vessel maker be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you will hold that when it is soaked in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes suitable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these cupping vessels are precious: recipe of castoreum, white balm, gingerbread, saffron pilate, long pepper, scraggy, and spice anointing unguent. And mix with the juice of bladder and of calf, and make pills, and one pill be tempered with tebeze water, and be given to the patient's nose sitting in front.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the Worms that are in the Extremities of the Nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is found that a worm is in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and multiplied in several days until one can see its regard.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you must incise that in the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the place or cauterize or medicine which is in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if it is delayed in its incision until it is magnified, then consider whether it is lapidated, hard, of dark color and of little sensation; then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times the one who incises this apostema becomes greatly maligned by it against that which had it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the place with what exists and constrains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Ear when Continuity is Dissolved by Wound or Similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when you have to deal with some cause of those, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and carefully cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then it is necessary that you excise each part of its own cord apparent until no blood flows.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on top of them sprinkle blood of dragon and well-stretched powder, and pause over the powder a piece of emplastrum diafinicon, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and let that be bound for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another plaster and let that remain until the flesh is abscinded, and then cure with scabbing until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity with thread or needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with lead or other materials and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the Two Lips in the parts behind.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it is found that some men in the parts behind their lips have certain apostemas hard and similar to grass errors, and some are smaller and others are greater.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then, it is necessary that you convert the lips and fissures each of those hardnesses in all parts, and then fill the place with sagitta powder, well-stretched, until the blood is restrained, and then wash with wine and be careful to cure the place with what exists, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the Incision of the Flesh Adjusted in the Gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great many times nay over the gummed flesh which the ancients called albulus, then it is necessary that you suspend that with a needle or that you hold that with the forceps and incise that as it should be, and let the blood flow or run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause over the place with sagitta powder or other stiptic or excitatory powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for then the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the parts behind and in front, and between the gums are adjusted scorching aspersions, rough, black, and some times are made citrines or green, until it is seen that through this corruption the gums are decayed and the teeth are rough.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head in your own seat, and remove the teeth in which those scorching aspersions and causes appear like sand, until there remains no cause of their own, and this will be done with the blackness and citrinity and other things until they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if this is at the beginning of the reasoning, good it is; and otherwise, then you iterate the reason over those for another day and for the second and for the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed many residues of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, because the razors with which the tooth is rasped from the part behind are another kind of razors with which it is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared by you which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Eradication of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all ease and gentleness in total eradication of it, for there is no cause that can sustain the existence of it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance into which it is excused in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But it is necessary that when the patient is prepared to eradicate that tooth, you must be firmly certified which is the aching tooth, for many times the pain deceives the patient and says it is in a healthy tooth, and then you eradicate that one and carefully note that the pain does not cease until the sick and aching tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then, since you are certified which is the aching tooth, and what you know well, it is necessary that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of all part, and then carefully remove that with your own hands or with fine forceps little by little until it becomes loose.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then, with great force hold tight the large instruments for good conversation or strong extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your own hands that you may not hurt them, and carefully remove the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then, if not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it at a distance from the tooth on all sides with ease and effort, removing it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is rough or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap a cloth around it and bind it with a thin thread at its extremity, so that it will not be torn in the hour of your constriction upon it when you take hold.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work with great care using a scraper in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve your strength so as not to break it and leave a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that will be greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not act like some ignorant barbers in their foolishness and audacity about the eradication of their own patients, for they do not administer what we have recounted; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are harder to be torn away, and all or some of those causes, or that extracts it with some bones of the jawbone just as many times we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then, after the eradication, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding from it, just like many times there is, then carefully take some quantity of zeig and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that zeig does not help, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine tweezers with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not doubled when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And should be like times of thick handle so that when you stretch with those they are not doubled, and short in length.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And should be made of Indian steel with handles made of straight extensions, and in the extensions of those some teeth are set which fit into each other and stretch by strong construction, and sometimes the extensions of those have the shape of a bird's beak, specifically that of a ciconia, so it is guarded, and they are of very strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of the Bones of the Jawbone Broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract the tooth that is broken by some cause, it is necessary that you pause over the place cut with a border for one day or two until the place is mollified; and then carefully grasp with gentle hands or forceps the extensions of which are assembled like the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their extensions are made behind, just like a lime or an almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to your gentle touch with these forceps or tweezers, then it is necessary that you cut through the bone and scrape off all the flesh and introduce the instrument called "atali", which is a small lever whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of short extension, thick and small, and not curved so that it will not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the bone is forgotten, good it is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extension in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle extension.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already having helped yourself with this instrument, you will find two ramps of which this is the form, approaching the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the cutting of teeth; for immediately it is made with this instrument which is assembled like a great once, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extension twisted or short, which has some thickness, and not curved so that it will not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And also know that the instruments of teeth are many and similar to each other.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle craftsmen in this art find for themselves according to what the operation means to them, and the various diseases; for they are of those diseases to which the ancients did not say or pause proper instrument, by the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jawbone or of other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it is twisted, then carefully place a small weight on that spot where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures such as this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be in that place some small thickness, little by little, and it should be wrapped or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then carefully restore the spot with medicines suitable for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small break in the bone, then carefully remove that from that break and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are elevated and not according to their natural form, and especially when they are in women, and even more so in venerable old ladies; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and there is no possible suture or ligament of it, then carefully remove it; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you will incise it with this instrument whose form is as follows; and it resembles the jawbone of a pig, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp extension.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your incision in which you will incise that tooth for many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not confused with another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the elevated tooth is exposed to decay, then carefully file it with a file of Indian steel whose form is this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And be it entirely of Indian steel and its margin finely sharpened; and be it with many small points just like a file in which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed gradually over many days with ease, so that another tooth is not confused and clogged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then carefully file it at the end, and remove it with some rasors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is broken and the tongue lies over it, then carefully file that tooth until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and equalized, and be filled in order that the tongue may not lie over it or corrupt the word.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by chance, and the patient cannot withstand what is happening, and you have cured that tooth with stiptic medicines, and it has not been effective, then carefully prepare in those that are strong with a gold filling and not silver, for silver turns green and soon becomes weak after some days, but gold is never changed.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And be the filling in such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the filling is that you take the filling and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and carefully increase it with two bends of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then carefully return to the original position, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your grip such that you strengthen the filling so that it does not escape from the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then carefully incise the superfluous edges of the filling with forceps or tweezers, and add them to each place with gestures, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then carefully let it set just like a stone.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that one or those with another filling in such a manner for all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just like these linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that one tooth or two returns to its place, and are re-grown just like we have recounted, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a good craftsman and wise person can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for some reason of cow bones, and it is made from them just like the shape of a tooth, and is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Incision of the Ligament which is in the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is sometimes found behind the tongue or is natural to it and one has not noticed it before, or accidental and occurs by accident of a wound which has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, and his existing tongue is in your sight; and lift up his tongue, and then carefully incise that ligament nerve according to its latitude, until the tongue is freed from its recent constriction.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that ligament there is some hardness or knotting, and it has been set by the consolidation of the wound, then you will take a thread and carefully cut it through its latitude until you have divided the ligament and the knotting is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not a false fissure in the prepuce of the flesh and that you cut here artery and bring forth flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then carefully wash the wound of the incision with water, vinegar, or fregged water; and then pause beside the tongue to relax it; thus is the way which keeps the patient's tongue relaxed in each night so that it will not consolidate again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the place with vitriol powder; but if the blood flows, then carefully cauterize the place with caustic lanolin which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully cure it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ranula behind the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, behind the tongue, an abscess forms similar to a small boil that prohibits the tongue from performing its natural function; and very soon it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth so that he is sitting in front of the sun and carefully observe the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a fiery red or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is softened to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion into it, and carefully incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it off from all sides; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause above a powder scattered, that is vitriol, until the bleeding is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed it in accordance with the place, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that with another cure suitable for this, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of an Abscess from Both Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet and other Abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When one endures in the Gullet a swelling, which are glands that are assembled together, which accidesc to the outside and are called two Ears, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of fiery red color, and has little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; before leave that to mature, and then either you will extract it or break it apart by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, rough, and the root of it is subtle, then that which is needed is to cut it.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already repaid its debt with complete rest or if it has decreased by some diminution; and then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head is in your sight, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of his tongue behind with an instrument of noble form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And be made of silver or iron, and be subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you take hold of that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and you gaze upon it with your own sight, then take an onion and place it on top of that, and pull it out towards the outside parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another way is to take some cause of tunics, and then carefully incise that with an instrument whose form is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, however the edges of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of Indian steel well tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not to your hand, then carefully incise that with a spatula whose form is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one notch, incise the other according to this same manner of incision, and then carefully give the patient a drink of water with vinegar.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, give the patient a drink of decoction of scorsone of myrtle or similar to that of other stiptic causes until the bleeding is stopped, and then carefully cure that one until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there are other abscesses in the gullet besides those two ears, and incise them according to what I have said in the incision of two notches equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already cured a woman of an abscess which was located in her gullet, which abscess tended to become fiery red, with little sensation, and had already closed off the gullet, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and had already forbidden herself from eating or drinking water, and had almost reached death if I had not acted for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had so swollen that it had formed two ridges and was about to burst through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I carefully cut open the fistula and remained in one of them, and pulled out that abscess, and it was drawn out with a great deal of discharge, and then I incised the other one from where it comprehended the other hole, and then I opened her mouth, and grasped her tongue, and then I placed the onion into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I carefully cut out a great part of it, and there was only a little bleeding.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the gullet of that woman was absolutely free, and she began to drink water soon after, and then I carefully prescribed food for her. And so I did not cease to incise that abscess many times over a long period, and successive abscesses appeared in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I went and cauterized the gullet of her, therefore above addition; and then I walked away and did not know what God had done for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Incision of an Umbilical Abscess when it is Apostemated.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the umbilical cord is diseased in the navel, and it is apostemated and is long, then it is called a "perpendicular" one; and if it is on the side that is thick and rounded, then it is called a "bubble".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with it, and it happens that the abscess has already gone away from there and is subtle, then you must incise that which is added on roundly; and if it reaches that length, and is sanguine, fiery red or black, and has no sensation in it, then you must fear the incision of it, because in that place there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you incise that according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, then you make the patient sit and take hold of his tongue with an instrument whose form is this: And carefully place the onion in the navel, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two notches.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise that, but only as much as is adjusted to the natural term without addition, because if you incise too much, you will deprive him of his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully incise it with that which we have mentioned in the incision of two notches, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you must use great care in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cauterization is nothing but with sharp water, and that you pause the head of the patient in your sight, and carefully grasp his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, and take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confine it to that living cause, and pause that no thick or subtle, and fill that concavity with the instrument whose form is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	And let the edge of it be in the concavity in which the medicine is paused, just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the navel, and the patient will stretch out his hand over his own side so that he may pour saliva or mouthwash from his mouth into that concavity through the intrinsic medicine, so that none of those causes will descend onto the gullet of him and trouble it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then carefully take your hand and the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour until you see it to be discolored and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a syringe or needle, and make sure that the cloth adheres to the syringe or needle, and do this as many times as you need until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it be so that it dries out and falls off about three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to iterate the medicine, iterate it, and then carefully cauterize it in the circuit of the uvula with cloth wrapped around it, and clean off any residue from the circuit of the medicine, and wash it thoroughly with vinegar water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with gargling, until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is even more saved than incision and less long in fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something even more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, myrrh, origanum, ruda, Arabic scicados, camomile, broth, and similar herbs to those of plants, and mix all those causes, or some of them, into a bath, and let them be submerged in vinegar water, and boil; and the bath should be well stirred with a decent stirring, and there should be a hole in the middle of the bath, on which should be placed an instrument made of iron or steel according to this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the uvula on the quinsy, until the uvula is quite obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process many times until it is dry, and be careful not to apply this cure at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would be too intense for the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather declare the appearance of the abscess first.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument, then take a reed and compose in the extremity of it a bundle of cotton, so that the mouth of the patient may be closed, because the closure of the cotton prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the Extraction of Thorns and of what adheres in the Gullet and of other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times something adheres in the gullet or thorn from a fish or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is apparent from those things that are seen above the gullet, because you grasp the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden to you in the gullet, then you must make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because the attached cause to the gullet will be forgotten by vomiting; or that the patient drinks a potion of nape or of razit of laytuga or a bowl of dry bread; or takes a piece of marine sponge, and binds it tightly with a thread, and then makes the patient swallow it, so that when it reaches the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take a snake and bind it tightly with a thread, and place it inside the patient's mouth and then pull it out; or take a fork and place it inside the patient's mouth and then pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes are not forgotten as we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And be more thick than a reed, a little one, and in the extremity of it be a concavity which you insert into the patient's gullet with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And it will make the patient's head rise upwards, and be careful that the touch of its bone in the throat is gentle, so that it does not disturb the flesh or the spine, or put pressure on the bone or the thorn.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But meanwhile, the patient will move that part of his body into a sweet position, by virtue of his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and its descent below, and pull his hand with the instrument towards him, all according to the quantity which is prepared in advance until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of Blood from the Gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is medicated with what we have said in the division of cure with medicines and does not agree, then consider that in the gullet of the patient to the sun, because you have grasped his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see blood, extract it with a small onion or with subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave syringe and insert it into the patient's gullet, and carefully pause in the concavity of the syringe an iron hot instrument, and do this many times (until the blood is dead and comes out of the gullet) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vial full of vinegar water, and work the patient's mouth with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause emerge from that and spoil the water for an hour afterwards by putting it in the patient's hand, because the blood will soon come out when it feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten as we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with camphor or with assafetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	This is how it will be, and then it will fall out.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operation in the subfumigation of that, which is: you take a bath in which are hot coals and the bath is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole; and the extremity of the instrument is composed in that hole; and then carefully wait above the subfumigation; and have the patient's mouth open at the extremity of the syringe, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will soon fall out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall out, then you must iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient water to drink, and give them salty causes and salted foods, and not give them vinegar water, and so it is necessary that with this regimen it will be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the gullet when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps like those, but with some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one that is placed in the gullet, and its extremity is like a stork's beak, which is grasped, in which a lime is sharpened, so that when it compresses any cause, that one does not loosen.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against abscesses and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus diverse in perforation and section of them by two manners, of which one is by the species of abscesses themselves; and therefore that they comprehend the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is according to the places in which they occur in the body, because an abscess that occurs on the head is another from one that occurs on the tailbone; and an abscess in a fatty location is another from one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And besides, some abscesses are such that they must not be pierced, but rather allowed to mature and heal on their own.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And some abscesses are such that they must be pierced when they are crossed, and not allowed to mature according to their natural course, just like those abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess that occurs near a joint is prolonged into the circuit of the joint, and then it is corrupted by affecting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near the main limb, and if you delay the puncture until the abscess has matured on the main limb, or it is an abscess near the anus, so pierce it when not yet mature; and do not pierce a green abscess, without proper digestion, but only that which is near the anus, in order to avoid prolonging the passage of stool and causing a fistula, or that it becomes a condition that cannot be cured.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and thus is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is mature when there is cessation of pain and fever, and accordingly the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the tip of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And thus it is necessary to know that the puncture should be made in the most dependent part of the abscess and closest to the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And puncture should be made through the length of flesh or muscle if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in areas of the loins, cords of nerves, or tendons; and finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the abscess is in a fatty location, then it is better that you wait until the perforation of it is confirmed by the digestion of it according to its natural course, as we have said; because if you puncture it too soon, it will prolong the process of the body's discharge and much pus, and therefore the lips of the abscess will be hardened and its depth increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are punctured according to the necessity of the location of the flesh or muscle, or according to what the affected member demands.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And some abscesses are such that the cord needs to be concaved and incised, when it is done in a way that is already stated, like those that occur in troops of boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And some abscesses are such that they are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is the one which is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as with those abscesses of the gout sufferers.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And some abscesses are such that they receive a circular section and a lunar section, and resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But as for the one that is not like those abscesses of lions, which are superficial and do not have a deep or complex shape, it is necessary to pierce it with a superficial puncture or only a flat one.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part, and then stop the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and so on many times according to gradation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a young child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit many times is resolved through the egression of pus, and then the patient will die, and you should intervene.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, keep this chapter with great caution, and carefully perform the puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, so that you cleanse the plagues and consider whether the plague of the abscess is small, or is a flat section; then administer those of like or similar things; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary to pause in each track until they are together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess one part of the cord has been severed or has been concaved in the circuit, then it is necessary to complete it with old cloth or a thread made from linen fabric, just as when you are binding pans or razors, its moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and accordingly process it and cure the patient with the same method until they are healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you should administer vinegar water and wine mixed with linen cloth, and pause that over the location of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer a regimen and cure, and dust those which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary to wrap powders in vinegar and oil, warm them, and pause them over those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary to pause powders wrapped in water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all should be cool within three days, just as we have said, and then you must loosen the abscess and cleanse it, and administer the cure according to what is suitable for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction that I have said about each abscess in which manner is the way of its cure by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the Section of Abscesses that occur in the Cord of the Head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head small abscesses occur, and there are species of nodes that contain tunics which are according to their facts; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pustules, and those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and resembling their own kind; and those that are lithoid, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should not make the extraction cause contraction of the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is similar to this, which is called an entrume, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then cut it with a section according to its length, in a superficial section following this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of the line .B. up to the line .G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, cut off that portion which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for many times it returns, if some cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And accordingly, submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that and leave it for another day, for by this, you will corrode all that remains of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, iterate over that cloth with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if it is needed of it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then cut into it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the form of a cross, and cut into it between two lips of the section and scrape off all that part, and strain your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery becomes contracted, then do what I have recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do with the lithoid abscess of section and cure according to what we have said; and the section over the lithoid abscess is more gentle, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are cases of these abscesses which are in the head of some men who do not have moisture; and this cause is because you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and break open the abscess like a deaf, harsh, white palsy that could not be shaken off, and if any force was applied to it, it would become infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur on the head, it is not this chapter, such as those that occur on the heads of children and in the crevices of the ears, but the section of all these shall be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncture at the lower part of them, so that it may be alleviated the body from the pus to the lowest parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And accordingly, cure those with what is suitable for its cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the Section of Scrofulas which occur in the Neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses occur in the neck and armpits and shoulders; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many which are generated between them, and all the scrofula of those is surrounded by its own tunic, just as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, just as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lithoid, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not yield to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Tocament, whose manifest color is akin to the color of the cord, and is spread out over all parts, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and does not swell, then you should incise it with a superficial section from above to below the body along the line of .G. up to the line of .B., and scrape off that part completely, and extend two lips of the cord with one or many oncements if necessary, just as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And be more cautious so that the vein or nerve is not cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And be careful not to cut too deep, lest you adjust your hand to your own mark or wound the patient, or else you would inscribe something that is not necessary to inscribe; for if you cut into a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound, whether it is a bruise or other powder that stops bleeding, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the abscess has subsided and the wound has become softened and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is severed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And accordingly, inquire about the sign given by your teacher if there is any remaining cause of other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofula, then it is necessary that you do not incise that scrofula from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Therefore, bind it with a double thread and leave it until it falls off on its own without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And accordingly, fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and accordingly cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close them as soon as possible so that there remains no superfluous excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you find that there remains excess due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and extract it, and administer suture and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture at the location where you find the point of maturation of it, and pause puncture at the lowest part of the body, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And accordingly, administer puncture with ointment and similar substances to those, in order that it may corrode what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, when you find that the wound is already cleansed, then cure it with ointment of generated flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the Section of Pilling off the Abscess which occurs in the Groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients have described this section in the pillography, and I have not seen any man in our land who has practiced it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with hemorrhoids, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the pillography, because through this, there would be no advantage for the patient, since all the veins and main vessels are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses located in the mouth or groin or both ears, when the disease is not in the cane, it is necessary to use the section of pillography to flee from the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the pillography behind three circles of the pillography, or four with a small section along the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section be in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood are nearby.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful, then it is necessary that he extends the cord of the groin with one incision, and accordingly cuts the cord into the channel, but avoids the vessels of blood if he sees any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And accordingly, incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified about the section of the channel by the flame which is from that place and comes forth with water which is broken down and by the absorption of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, as the hour is re-matured in which puncture is feared, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and close it alone except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, administer medicines that make the flesh to heal, until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of this sermon which we have recounted is nothing but to see that some of these abscesses have opened up the groin of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the pulse of life is interrupted, and some are about to incise the epigastrium so that the patient may breathe over the location of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore, I command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; and therefore, I command that way the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a cote and placed it in his groin and incised a part of the canal of the lung, and you were called to its cure, and opened up the mouth as if it was crying out like one who is dying, and discovered the wound and opened up the blood which was flowing from the small part of the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you were confessed that it had not cut into a vein nor a nerve, and the wind was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And there was no harm to the servant except that he grew hoarse in his voice, and accordingly some days returned to better disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say to you that in the section of pillography, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the Section of Abscess which occurs in the Groin outside and is called Hernia of the Groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess is named Hernia of the Groin and is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, there is no way to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to abscesses that are caused by the constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make assumptions about it unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed with that and investigate it according to the dictum, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it as one would incise nodes, and extract it with what contains the skin and bursa; and otherwise, you should scrutinize all its being, and accordingly cure the location where it needs to be cured until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the Section of the Species of Nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, many species and you have already said all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence, so as to dispel doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you say that with an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is calmed; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that ciphac lion which is in its own sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and is made thus as a vessel, whether major or minor, and they are two species, either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, according to what you said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you expose it and inquire into its beginning with a instrument which is called an intrumentum, according to what will come forth in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiring into abscesses and all nodes, that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid location which you find in the abscess, and you turn the points of the instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And accordingly, your hand should be last according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and accordingly extract the intrumentum and consider what is situated in its vestige.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture current is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you should incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the vestige of the intrumentum there is no moisture, then you should know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over with a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus as I have taught you, and suspend it with one incision, and excise the cord from all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sack, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it happens so, and accordingly you should extract it piecemeal until there is no longer any cause from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from it remains no cause, a little or too much, the node will return to its former state.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that from it remains some small part, then complete the wound with certain corrosive powders acute and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which is seated apostema cautiously, and cure that from other cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great node, then you should close the two lips of it and cure it with that which nourishes.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it, or non-pulsating, then you should compress and apply pressure to the location of threefold stitches that are vertigo-like, and let that rest for two or three days until the wound is quieted and the ebullition of blood ceases; and accordingly return to incising what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the Forms of Instruments necessary in Section and Perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, the forms of intruments are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium, and some small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of great intrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of medium intrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small intrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of alfulud, and of curved extremities descending, in order that the instrument may be inserted into abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium, and some small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great instrument, the shape of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of medium instrument, the shape of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of small instrument, the shape of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Conveniently, these are for those abscesses and excrescences and fistulas and boils, because among them there are of bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus they are made of redontz, grosses, leons, just like great needles with which the seams are sewn, and they are made of terra citri, or of earth or iron or silver, And the best ones are when they are made of terra citri.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black plume instruments, which are adapted to those in which the fistulas are located in the concavity of which there are reflections, which are reflected in their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, that is to say, some of them are long, and some medium, and some short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great instrument of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium instrument of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small instrument of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are many species, that is to say, some are simple, which have only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them are orphic needles, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are needles with two curvatures, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are needles with three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a simple great needle, the shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a simple medium needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a simple small needle, the shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an orphic great needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an orphic medium needle, the shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of an orphic small needle, the shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a great needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small needle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a great needle having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium needle having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small needle having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are sectioned and excised, and there are three species, that is to say, some are great, some medium, and some small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that there is no fear of cutting into a vein or nerve, and by them the patient is cured and obtains tranquility for a little while due to the adjustment found necessary for the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, medium, and small, just like veins.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a great ligature:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium ligature:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small ligature:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of terra and resemble rays with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it has on the pointed end a hidden point and in that it goes through the parted parts within and without, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the said points for the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: great, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventozas with which the flow of blood is arrested, and there are three species: great, medium, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of terra citri, rounded in some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that you have these species of ventozas, great, medium, and small, in order that through them the flow of blood may be arrested with speed when needed, and therefore, when your first remedy is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you should not use them to arrest blood in all parts of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy locations, just like in the skin folds of the thighs and groins, and in the armpits and nipples and belly and groin areas, and similar to those of fleshy human skin.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made of those small instruments resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is arrested when it is cut through phlebotomy, or due to incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made rounded according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the Cure of Men's Breasts which are assembled like Women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen as they begin to sleep, and accordingly they become swollen, and the breasts like those of women, apostematosed, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to that one who has this condition, it is necessary to incise those parts with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and accordingly excise all the swelling, and accordingly fill the wound with an incarnate medicine, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to its parts and is softened by its magnitude, just like in women, then it should be cut into two equal parts, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one should be contained within the other until the end of each one, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from the line of .B. to the line of .G. And accordingly excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer that which we have said about suturing and powders which are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which should be cut because of the unease of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a submergent potion in corrosive oil and leave that one until the corroded part that remains of the grayness, and accordingly cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Perforation of Abscesses that come forth with Lichenification.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those abscesses that come forth with lichenification are of the species of scrofulae, hard ones, which contain a bag of skin.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of those contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, then you should fill it with good oil and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, the oil should be stopped and the wound should be cured with a suitable poultice for that, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrofulae, then you should cut over it just as we have said in the section on scrofulae similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes a poultice, then you should administer to it a cautery according to what we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the Section of Abscesses that occur through Artery or Vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the cord which is above it becomes consolidated, then many times an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: for when an abscess is caused by an artery, it is long aggregated in the precordium of the body; and when you impelate the abscess with those said ties, you will feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is caused by a vein is rounded to the manifest of the chest.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this abscess is an error, and most especially in those that are situated near the armpits, groins, neck, and many other places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid its cure with iron, and that which is located in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is due to the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, you should cut in the cord section in length; and accordingly, you should make the section with scissors and accordingly apply it to the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And accordingly, you should sew that thread and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which cause is to your eyesight in extracting two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And accordingly, you should push the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until the blood that is in it flows out and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, you should administer a cure in which fire is generated until the ligaments fall away; and accordingly, you should cure that one with suitable poultices for it until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to section of a vein, then you should hold the place with your hand on the abscess and the cord, and accordingly introduce the needle below the location which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that file double so that you can extract that one from the other side, and accordingly tie the abscess with a double ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligature of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then accordingly introduce a thread with that needle below all the abscess so that the incision of the first needle is made, and tighten the four threads in those places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And accordingly, cut the abscess in the middle of it so that when what is in it is evacuated, you should incise the superfluity of the cord, and leave what remains tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, apply to it the poultice which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and accordingly administer the cure made with some and powders until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter L of the Abscess that occurs due to Torsion of Nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, so too does an abscess occur in the nerves when it occurs through percussion or excessive travail, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made the most in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where the joints are bad.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a great abscess, and is akin to the color of another body, and is in the greater part of it disposed to its place, when it is stretched with great vehemence, and then in it the patient seems stupid.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the precordium of the body, and therefore it remains outside, and it is bad on all sides and does not go to any parts before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, the one that is in the joints should not be sewn with iron, for very lightly it would bring about contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But the one that is on the head or forehead should have the cord cut with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then you should take it away with forceps and cut it from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you should suspend it with scissors, and excise that, and accordingly stop that; and adjust the wound with sutures, and cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the Section of Abscess which occurs in the Abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	I have observed in some men many times that certain parts of their bellies and other parts of their bodies are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head is thick; and the lips of these are conversed, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have also seen one, and in the belly of it were two thorns which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones with fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise them and cut into one in pieces that weigh 18 ounces. and the other weighs 6 ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider at the time if the patient is humid, and the color of the thorn is white, humid, with fine roots; then you should cut into it with a spatula late, and have cauterizers in the presence of fire, because many times the section of it is expelled with much blood; and if you see the blood flowing, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and trembling, be careful not to cut with iron; but rather take a lead thread freshly made, and tighten it on that thorn, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And accordingly adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the lead thread greatly on that thorn, until it is cut off and falls away by its own travail.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the thorn is of great root, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and dread, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But possible is that you cut off most of it, and accordingly cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And accordingly, cure that one until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to cut that thorn which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and little regard, for it is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will find memory of a cancerous abscess accordingly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the Cure of an UMBILICAL HERNIA.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the cicatrix which is above the belly, and eyes of it bursting forth as if it were a bag or pouch according to what has been said in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by ventosity constricted in there.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and bursting forth of the bag, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and accordingly appears in different situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the bursting forth of the bag, then the situation of that with respect to water which we have recounted, and more vehement diversity, and as you press that with the threads said, it is concealed, and accordingly returns; and very soon it will be in its place, and is magnified much with regard to the introgression of blood and vehement travail.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to humidity, then the situation of that one is like an onion and not concealed when you press with your hand, nor constrained, nor crept.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then accordingly, the abscess appears with these signs declining towards blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to nothing but flesh, then accordingly, the abscess is a great one, large and hard, and is situated according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to ventosity, then accordingly, the touch of it is like an onion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in that case is to consider at the time if the umbilical hernia is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or ventosity; accordingly, you should be prohibited from curing it, for in that case there is fear and dread just as I have taught you in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the umbilical hernia is due to the bag or the pouch, then accordingly, you should command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and accordingly, make a sign with your tent in the circuit of all the umbilic, and accordingly, command him to stand between your arms on his right side, and accordingly, circle around with a spatula wide in the circuit of the umbilic over the place which you have marked with your tent; and accordingly, extend most of the abscess upwards with scissors large; and accordingly, tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or cord and the manner of tying decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And accordingly, cut the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and introduce the said thread into it and seek out the bag; and if you have not found nor guarded by the ligament, then accordingly, you should extract the remaining portion and push the bag towards the parts inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have reached the pouch, then accordingly, take it with scissors; and cut out the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then accordingly, circle around that much, and accordingly return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and introduce two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, so that they will penetrate; and accordingly, tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the place until the flesh extended falls away by itself; or cut it when it is softened and falls apart, and accordingly cure that one with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the umbilical hernia is caused by flesh nothing in that place or due to humidity, then accordingly, you should conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity which you find in it, and accordingly cure that one with water as needed and consolidate the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division, about the species of cancer and how it should be treated with medicines, and that it is a warning to avoid curing it with iron because it would not be ulcerated; and we have also said that cancer is generated in the majority and caution of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as in the breast or armpit and its likenesses of limbs allocated to extract all of it, and especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and great, you should not take ownership of it, for I have not seen anyone cure it completely or partially, nor has it been passed down to this day.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in that case is when it is allocated as we have said, which is to precede and leave the patient and purge them with black cholera several times, and accordingly sign it, if there is a clear manifestation of repletion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And accordingly, prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for the operation, and accordingly prohibit in the tract of scissors those that are needed for it; and accordingly, concave all parts with a good cord for thorough excision so that no cause remains for the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And accordingly, let the blood flow and do not cut it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the gross blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a contrariety of gross blood incision in the vein or artery, then accordingly cauterize that one until the flow of blood ceases, and accordingly cure that one with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Cure of Hydroceles.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, about the species of hydroceles of water and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured with iron is not but the species of hydroceles alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanic sac or to the species of hydropsy, for this is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydroceles tympanic sac with medicines and your treatment has not been confirmed, then accordingly consider, for if the patient is already debilitated, or has another malady, such as in the lungs or belly and similar to those, then accordingly be careful not to treat it with iron, for fear is over that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you treat the patient with abundant virtue, and in it there is no other malady except hydroceles alone, and not infant or old, then accordingly the manner of the operation for it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and minister to him accordingly, expressing the belly of him with his own hand, filling the water at the exit of the pentenilh, and accordingly take a spatula with spines in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	to be of two sharp parts long, with an acute extremity like a spatula; but however, there should be in it some smallness little by little, so that in the operation on it, one does not penetrate into the bag and leaves it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And accordingly consider if the generation of hydroceles is from one of the bags, for then you should take with the section to be away from the navel by three times as much as the parts left behind, on the right side of it above the pentenilh.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydroceles is due to liver disease, then accordingly your section should be on the left side of the navel by three times.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then accordingly your section should be in the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary that your section be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie down, so that the superfluities do not flow into that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And accordingly perforate the entire cord with an instrument and enter into that section, lift your hand with a spatula between the cord and the sac, and excise it; and if the quantity of one fingernail or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And accordingly pierce the cicatrix until the spatula reaches the place where you want it to be, and it is the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And accordingly extract that one and enter with an instrument whose shape is this:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver canula; it is made of silver or copper or bronze, at which the bottom part has a small hole, and on both sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is cut according to the manner of a feather, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the uppermost part of it is an eyelet, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that one immediately falls on top of the instrument, and thus evacuates a moderate quantity of water, for if you evacuate more than what is needed at this time, soon the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or else you will cause harm to them which is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate as much as the virtue of it and according to what your dispositions indicate for the patient's vitality, pulse, and goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And accordingly extract the instrument, and retain the water which is retained because it is held back by the cord which retains the hole that is above the cicatrix of which we have said to you that you should pierce it in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And accordingly iterate the instrument to another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and make this go on for some days with caution, and be careful not to err until there is very little water left.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and leave a great quantity of water, then accordingly cure it with burial in hot sand, and moisten with warm bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and cure it with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and liver accordingly with the extraction of water, according to what we have recounted earlier.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the Cure of Children Who are Born with Undescended Testicles Not Perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times some of the children are born like that, from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture not perforated (or it is a narrow hole or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then accordingly, make a small incision on the child as soon as it is born with a spatula made of subtle bronze in this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And accordingly, pause in the hole a small clip made of subtle lead and tie it, and let it be for three days or for four times.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it is time to urinate, it should be renewed and reformed; and accordingly, return that one.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow it to close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one of which the hole is narrow should be treated with a lead clip, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the hole is not in its place are led astray, which is because from them, that which is born and thrusts forth is due to the end of the head of the foreskin so that it cannot urinate into the parts behind, until it lifts the foreskin with its own hand to the parts above; and this is not a generation, for which reason the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a miserable disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in this case is that the patient be laid on his back, and accordingly extend the head of the foreskin with your left hand with a violent extraction, and incise the head of the foreskin at the location of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as a feather is cut or if you cut out some part, so that the middle of it becomes like the head of the foreskin and the hole falls in the middle place according to what is needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of blood flow, for many times this happens; and pause at the place where you cut the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the Foreskin which Accidents in the Prepucii of the Head of the Foreskin, and on Corruption, Blackness, and Adhesion of the Prepucii to the Head of the Foreskin.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this foreskin becomes inflamed in the head of the foreskin and is an excessive prominence of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend with a subtle thread and cut it so that all of it becomes free from the foreskin; and accordingly pause over it for three days in an Egyptian ointment; and accordingly cure it with another ointment, day by day, until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the foreskin is malignant, with a foul color, then accordingly you must administer caustics around the incision and the surrounding area.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the foreskin is in the prepucii of the head of the foreskin not-circumcised, and one part of the foreskin is inside the prepucii and the other part is outside, then accordingly you must remove the foreskin that is inside at first until it is consolidated; and afterwards you cure the one that is outside, for when you cure both together with the prepucii, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And already many accidents occur in the genitals and prepucii, namely blackness and corruption; therefore it is necessary to conquer all this which is already denigrated and which already wants to corrupt or has corrupted; and accordingly line on top of that with a mixture made from honey, which is mixed with flour of scoria of millet and of errors trampled and crushed.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And accordingly cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, then accordingly administer lunar caustics in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for the caustic juice is good at two dispositions together, that is to say in bleeding and in a wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is destroyed and all in an instant, then accordingly it is necessary to introduce a lead tube into the meatus of the prepucii so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepucii to the head of the foreskin (and this adhesion only occurs in one who has an uncircumcised prepucii, and on whom no circumcizion has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) it is necessary to excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to remove those excrescences exactly, then accordingly it is necessary to excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the foreskin and the prepucii, and thus it is because when the prepucii is subtle, it is easily perforated by its subtlety lightly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And accordingly separate between the prepucii and the head of the foreskin with a thread of subtle lead, which has been moistened in water so that they will not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And accordingly it should be cured with a vinegar-strengthened remedy until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the Circumcision of Children and the Cure of What Occurs to Them in Circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but since it is our operation and our will, and the purpose of which is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it a better operation and way that is more gentle and less hurtful to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have discovered through experience, which reason is that you have found that most of the artists and barbers use circumcising and cleansing with a new razor and with toreros; and they tie with a thread and inscribe with a nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already forbidden all these methods and did not find better cleansing with razors, threads that tie with a thread like the nail in cleansing, because many times the cord above has fled, because the cord of the prepucii has two tunics, and the tonic is left behind, and soon it will be forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the cleansing method that is made by aliphatic acid, and is digested, which is used by barbers, is not assured of the incision at the end of the virile member, because soon it will enter into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a nail, soon iron will be oxidized and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is such that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the cleansing that is done with razors and threads with a thread, the goodness of it has been discovered by me through experience, because the razors are of proportional incision, for which reason the acuity above is as the acuity below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally two acuities, and inscribe accordingly in one time; and it is made compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of the operation is that you should make the child stay in a state of quietude, whether it is one of those who understand a little or not, and that you should only lay the thread on the foreskin so long as necessary, and then leave it alone until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And accordingly make the child happy in all that manner which is possible to you, according to what it receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And accordingly make the child sit between your arms, well prepared and not at all frightened; and hide the razors in your hand or in your lap, so that the child does not see them or any other instrument.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And accordingly place your hand on the foreskin of him and blow into the cord, and pull it until the head of the foreskin is out, and accordingly cleanse that which has accumulated in the area of the foreskin.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And accordingly place the marked spot with double thread, and accordingly tie a small piece of it as a second ligature, and accordingly tie it on the said point with good retention, and inscribe between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly lift the cord slightly and pull out the head of the foreskin; and accordingly let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and pause powder above and on top of the powder, a cloth spread with yolk of egg mixed with oil recently roasted beef; and leave that on that until the next day; and cure that with a remedy until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the razors for cleansing, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Be the outer edges not cutting and the inner ones cutting, so that there is no space left for the hinge of the lock, and be the length of both acuities as the length of two equal hands.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in cleansing is that soon the inner cord will be entirely or partially cut off from its inscription.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore it is necessary that you extend that of your hour with your finger before the apostema of the place and that you inscribe it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then accordingly extract it with a thread and inscribe it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the foreskin has become inflamed again, then accordingly you should let it be for a little while until the inflammation is subsided cautiously, and then excise it with facility, and inscribe it according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the foreskin, for it will not be at all in that place.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore cure that with the water which has consolidated from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inscribed by the cord with measure, and submits to the parts above, then this will not be noticed at all.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore cure that with the water which we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made through fear or blood congested, or through pouring or fleshiness, and it resembles those cases which we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it being caused by fear which is in the neck of the bladder, then accordingly the patient should be encouraged on his own desires.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And accordingly place the patient's feet on his own back and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and the patient should strain his arm as much as is possible to him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore accordingly the neck of the bladder is constricted for expulsion of the fear to the parts behind, so that the urine is eliminated.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then the cause is vehement and made upon the patient, accordingly it is necessary to administer extraction of it by instrument which is called syringe, the form of which is as follows: It should be made of silver and a subtle lead combined, like a canula of an eagle's quill with subtlety of ray long in similitude of half a palm, with a thin cane in its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting urine with that is as follows: You take the doubled thread and tie it in the extremity of the lanolin or cotton for good binding; and then you insert the ends of the thread into the posterior part of the syringe, and inscribe with razors if any superfluous cause of the lanolin exists, but instead introduce it into the canula with vehemence And accordingly you should pour the ciringua into the border and album of egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on the seat, and wrap the bladder of him and the foreskin with olive oil and egg yolks.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And accordingly insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the foreskin; and accordingly double the foreskin above at the part of the belly; and accordingly push the syringe into it; and accordingly push it in until it reaches the bladder, and that will cause the patient to be relieved from the desired cause, and not made as such according to this order, but rather the way it goes to tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And accordingly stretch the thread with the lanolin little by little, because the urine will soak the lanolin.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And accordingly extract that and make for urine cure, and use syringe, do not cease to do so and use syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient obtains relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clampseed and similar instruments which are in accord with that.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or apostema occurs in the bladder, or blood congestion in it, or it is constricted by pouring, and you want to make it distill with waters and medicines, then accordingly use an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	except that at the extremity of it there is a stopper, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that oppresses it, without addition, until when some cause is pulled out by the humidities, it will be pulled out, and when it is expelled, with water it will be pulled out, and when it is expelled long, as the clampcedra does to which naphta is poured in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to provoke humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and pull out with that water which is poured into the upper parts, because the humidity is pulled into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And accordingly insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the foreskin according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and accordingly pour out the humidity with water which pours out, because that humidity comes to the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the cathartic instrument with which the bladder is cathartized, and it is this form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, the head being similar to a small feather, and with a thin cane inserted into the ligature.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And accordingly take the bladder of motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to cathartize in the bladder, and accordingly tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and warm up that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And accordingly insert the extremity of the cathartic instrument into the foreskin.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And accordingly place your hand on the bladder with the humidity stretched downwards until the patient feels that that humidity has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then accordingly take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate that all around its entire circumference; and accordingly insert a strong thread into those holes, just as they are revolved; and accordingly add the circle in such a way that it is added also to the other parts, so that you pause on that which you want of the humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And accordingly tie that to the instrument and make it like you did with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of Fear.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of fear and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between fear generated in the lungs and fear generated in the bladder, and the signs of it.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the fear in which one can perform an operation with hand and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the fear generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you will narrate it with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that fear generated in the bladder mostly appears to children; and among its signs is that the urine that comes out of the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient trembles his foreskin, and many times looks pale, and accordingly is dressed; and with this you will find the tail in moles of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to cure children of that until they have reached 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people, it is easier for this reason because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which fear is greater and cure is more easy; And if there is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that to cleanse the patient with a cathartic instrument which extracts all the fissure that is in their intestines; for that fissure sometimes hinders the formation of fear by the investigation of him.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And accordingly be present the patient with their feet and be comforted and strengthened by rest for so that fear may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or sometimes jump from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And accordingly make that person sit between your arms prepared, and those of him are left with his things, for so that the bladder is made to decline entirely to the posterior parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And accordingly pour out all that and everything outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel fear in the space, then accordingly you should crouch down soon with section on him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel completely the presence of his touch, then accordingly it is necessary that you anoint with oil the said indication of your left hand, whether the patient is a child or a young adult in full bloom, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And pour out fear until it stays behind your said indication.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And accordingly press on that with your said indication, and push it out into the posterior parts outside of the location from which you took the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press on the bladder with her right hand; and command another minister to extend the legs upwards with her left hand, and with her other hand to relax the cord which is below the legs, in a part of the location where the section is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And accordingly insert a spatula which is incident to this form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And accordingly insert a spatula which is incident to this form:
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that of the fear there is some which has an angle and margin, for which the emission of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that fear there is one which resembles a grain, and is round, and is made for easier emission.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is this type with angle and margin, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not so, then accordingly you must generate on that, or strengthen on that with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be like a file with which you strengthen on fear, and do not escape from there; or insert below that subtle instrument with curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do so, then accordingly you should amplify the hole a little bit, and if you see a flow of blood, cut off the strength with vitriol powder.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the fear is more than one, then accordingly at first you will push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and insert it on that; and accordingly push in a little bit above that; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is great fear, then ignorance is that you insert that with great section, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: or that they die or that they are unable to undergo continuous urine distillation, therefore where the location is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture with razors into which it extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then accordingly fill the wound with the juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause on that cloth infused in oil and vinegar, or in rosy oil and water, for so that the apostema may be calmed.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And accordingly lay the patient on his back, and do not loosen the ligature for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been loosened, wrap the wound with water and some oil, and accordingly cure it with divine ointment and devilish balsam until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs apostema, acute and corrosive, and of that it appears as if blood is congealed in the bladder with frost, and because of that urination is forbidden (and this is known by the egress of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your said indication into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, with what is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And accordingly in all the hours of your cure, you should lie down with both the legs and adjust the medicines which are paused on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the fear is small and is in the head of the foreskin, and is fixed there, and emission of urine is prohibited, then accordingly cure that with what you recommended before reaching section, for many times accused by this cure; and now I have tried it too, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron alloy, whose form is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And accordingly take the thread and tie it to that foreskin below the fear, for that reason that it may not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And accordingly insert the iron into the foreskin, perforating with ease until the perforator comes to that fear.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And accordingly turn the perforator with your hand in that fear little by little, and you will make the perforation of it until you make that other part penetrate; for the urine is soon abolished.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And accordingly press your hand on that which is remaining of the fear from the outside part of the foreskin, for that is tightened, and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not adapted to your equipment for some reason that prohibits it, then accordingly tie a thread below the fear, and another thread above the fear.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And accordingly insert yourself on the fear in that foreskin between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And accordingly extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And accordingly loosen the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the fear, except that it may not return to the bladder, and the other thread above, so that when the thread is loosened near the emission of the fear, the cord returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you when you have tied the thread above, that you lift the cord to the upper parts, or that you return to your previous complement, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Extraction of Fear from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Fear in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if fear appears in some of them, then it is difficult to cure it and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their reasons is that the woman is very ashamed.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you cannot find a woman who is well-versed in the art of childbirth and who would deliver herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or who has no husband.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art, especially the operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the location of the section on fear in women is too far from the location of the fear, so you need a preceding section, and in this there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to this, then accordingly it is necessary that you take a midwife who is well-versed and not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of her, then accordingly look for a midwife who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman matron who has been initiated in the art of women, or a woman who has divided from this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present her and command her to do all that you will tell her from the beginning of the inquiry on fear; which cause is that she should look if the woman is chaste, then accordingly put your said indication in her rectum and desire the fear.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that, cut it below your said indication, and then command her to insert it on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not chaste, then accordingly command the matron to insert her said indication into the anus of the patient and inquire about the fear, since she will place her left hand on the bladder and compress it with a good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that, then accordingly it is necessary to gradually relax that from the orifice of the bladder down to the lower parts with the summit of her virtue until it reaches the rectum of the wound.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And accordingly insert it on that opposition of the majority of the anus to the rectum of some part so that the fear is in that part, and the said indication of yours not be relaxed from the fear cut off below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at first; and accordingly insert the ruler on that section, and if you feel the fear, then adjust to section according to the quantity which you know will cause the fear to be driven from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the species of fear are many: for some are small and great, and lion-like and harsh, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many species there are of it by this which you signify on what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust with vitriol powder on that location and keep it for one hour until the blood is stopped, and accordingly return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of fear from men, for that reason that you will be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the instrument inserted, then accordingly you pause powder on that location and strengthen it with powders and strictures descending, and do not iterate this; and leave the fear alone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And accordingly cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the sharpness of blood has ceased after some days, and the location is well, then accordingly you return to your operation until the fear is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the Section on Hernia in the Abdomen.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia in the abdomen is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white apron which is below the cord of the genitals containing the urine, and is called a ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the own apron which nature has prepared for the urine in the part of the bladder, until it is full and another urine; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white apron which we have said, and it is not that but a taut cord.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, for that reason that it flows out from them this matter, and sometimes it happens through a blow made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it either declines to citrine or sanguine, or red, or is blackish feculent, or white watery, and that is what is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is so: for if it is in the white apron which we have said, then accordingly the apostema is rounded declining a little towards length, and appears like the figure of urine, and shows the genitals, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the own apron, then accordingly the apostema is rounded with the part of urine and by that one estimates that it is another urine.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white apron, then accordingly it is cut off below the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then accordingly you try out the color of the moisture in the apostema by inserting a stick from which the form is preceded; and according to that which is found in the vestige of the stick, judge what it is below.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then accordingly it is necessary that you command the patient to be flebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes fill up his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And accordingly lie on your back on some cause a little above, and pause below him many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And accordingly sit you on the left side of him, and command the minister to follow on the right side of him, which will extend her hand to one or two sides to the cord of the genitals and to the part of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And accordingly take a spatula late and cut the cord of the genitals in half through the middle location, to the length almost up to the pubic bone.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And be made the section according to equal measure distant from the line which should be drawn on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white apron inclusive.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe, and be cautious for yourself that you do not insert it; and your excision with which that is excised by partition below, so that it is suspended in the urine more and subtly scrutinize the excision according to the quantity possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And accordingly pierce the white apron full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And accordingly separate between two lips of the section with uncles, and stretch the white apron to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals inclusive, and insert the white apron in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it with its totality or in pieces, and more so the subtle sides, for if you do not scrutinize the insertion of him carefully, there is no surety that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the urine proceeds from that outside of its cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the white apron, return to it, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suturing, and accordingly cure it just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the urine corrupted by another disease, then accordingly it is necessary that you loosen the vessels which are sore the suspender, and extract the urine, and accordingly cure it with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And accordingly you wash away the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and pause before another wool which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the navel; and pause above folded cloths and powders, and bind those above with a ligament according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and accordingly two cloths are pressed and filled with Carmenated wool according to this likeness; and the extremities are made with those which are premuted of cotton or wet wool, and added to the structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the anus to the thigh, and the second takes from the part of the pubic bone, and two extractions above two cresses below and two other extractions above two garters, and all the structure is adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauterizer in the place of section with iron; and it is that you take a cauterizer cutlery subtle and insert it into the cord of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recounted, until the white apron containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cauterizer according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And accordingly pierce through that white apron, and ignite until all the humidity is exhausted.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And accordingly stretch the white apron with uncles, and excise with uncles, and excise with a subtle cauterizer ignited; and insert that into what is possible for you until it radiates all of it; and be cautious not to let the fire touch the urine.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more saved and longer in terms of blood flow, and better than an operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if it happens to you that an apostema is caught in the hour of section or at the hour of cauterization, or blood flow, then accordingly it is necessary that you cure which contrariety makes for you by that, with a treatment which is suitable for him according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is poor and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then accordingly administer perforation according to what we have recommended here; and it is when you are certified by this signification that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then accordingly you should make the patient lie on some elevated ceiling, and pierce the apostema in the lowest part of him with a spatula late, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be the aperture wide enough for all the water to flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And accordingly pause on the place cotton and bind it and leave it, in order that the remaining water may flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And accordingly cure that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrariety is against the flow of water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for this reason because the white apron in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water, then accordingly it is necessary to put into the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropisies, the form of which is preceded; or adjust a small one in the opposite part of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and is accumulated accordingly for about 2 months or thereabouts; and when it is accumulated, then accordingly it should be pierced according to that manner of procedure, in order that the patient may thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the Section about Fleshly Hernia and its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia there is fear of being lost to perdition in greater dispositions; therefore, it has been seen by me the dismissal of him and being saved through that which is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in this case and the species of the apostemes.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apostemes are born in those whose genitals are composed and it is made so by many causes: or by acute and bitter superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a grave apostema.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very often it is a fatty apostema, the color of which is dark, and there is no sentiment in him.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by blockage of the arteries, and by inflammation of those so that already there is a recollection of him, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by inflammation of the arteries is known by the distribution of the apostema when you compress it with those said ties; and it does not need for him to touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from him for any reason, even with compression using those said ties.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section should be made and on the other flesh; and it is that you insert the cord of the genitals, and accordingly stretch the urine to the upper parts, and extract that from the white apron, and deliver the suspender of the vessels, and bind them, and insert the suspender more than you deliver that of all part of the parts of the urine.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the urine is already consolidated with those fleshly matters, then accordingly it is necessary that you extract the urine and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the white apron or between what is between the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert it with a rounded insertion.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then accordingly it is necessary that you insert all that is of him, and extract the urine just as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, then accordingly fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and vinegar; and accordingly cure that with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the Cure of Hernia which is of Vine.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vine is an aposteme enveloped by some wrapping resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to perform movements, exercise, and walking.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease it is due to fear, because of which memory precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I must say that the operation in this case should be done according to what I did first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to make the patient lie on an elevated ceiling; and accordingly, enfold the suspender of the testicles at the lower parts; and accordingly, take hold of the cord of the genitals with those said ties and vessels which are proved by the sheath; and hold these other ministers that you have, and extend them with a strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And accordingly insert into the spatula late with a cross section on the right side of the vessels, until the vessels are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And accordingly excise from all parts just as we have said in extraction of arteries which are on the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And accordingly place in those an awl with a faithful double thread, and tie that to the first of the places where it occurs, and tie that other time at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And accordingly insert those in the middle location by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And accordingly cure the wound with the cure of other wounds in which you wish to be generated by that which falls from the vessels which nourish one of two genitals, for it is not bad because of this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the vit affects all the vessels, then accordingly it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles by this means be joined with the vessels, in order to be deprived of all nourishment by the section of the vessels, and to be extinguished, or to become hardened because it will not be nourished by them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Cure of Hernia Intestinal.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to a section that takes place in the apron extended over the belly from the navel to the groin, so that bursting forth from one of those intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the apron or of excess of him, and it occurs in two species due to many causes: or percussion, or by force, or by noise, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by similarities.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the apron, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an aposteme which grows evenly within the prepuce because the apron compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of him is when it is due to section of the apron, because at the beginning it causes sudden and violent pain; and it is an aposteme which appears differently underneath the apparent cord, and this is because of the intestine's protrusion, and his body goes out to the parts outside the apron.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten in the intestine's membrane, and this is called intestinal hernia cirrhotic.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with ventosity, and sometimes it runs into the intestine's fissure, and here it is retained, and this is accompanied by great pain for the patient, and sometimes it makes a wicked and greater pain when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of this disease's species with iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the mistake in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation in that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine with his own hand to the parts outside of his conqueror if he obeys his returnment, and accordingly it should be enveloped over his back between your hands, and raise the patient's legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And accordingly take hold of the cord which cuts off the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and insert the cord of the testicles all along; and accordingly place in two lips of the section uncis according to what is needed to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget from that, the urine should be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And accordingly excise those apron-like things which are underneath the cord of the testicles, until the white hard apron is discovered in each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then accordingly you should tie the said thread to that which is tied to the testicle, in that which is between the white apron and the one that is underneath the cord of the urine, and between the second apron, and absolve from that adhesion which is in the part behind the urine.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And accordingly take hold of the cord of the testicles with your left hand, and extend the white apron on top with your right hand, and raise the urine to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the urine upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search for those said threads so that there may be no cause of the intestine being enveloped in the white hard apron.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause from him, then accordingly you should tie that to the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And accordingly take a needle with a thread of four threads, and insert that in the last part of the apron, which is underneath the cord of the testicles, where the section is; and accordingly, insert the extremities which protrude from the thread into four threads, and accordingly compose some of them on some figure in manner of a cross; and tie with that the apron which we have said is underneath the cord of the testicles with strong bond of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And accordingly envelop the extremities of the threads and tie those with a strong bond, in order that some of the vessels which nourish them may not be able to transmit any cause by which here an aposteme may occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And accordingly pause another bond after the first bond, about three inches away; and accordingly let those two bonds be from the apron which is underneath the cord of the testicles the quantity of the greatness of the thread, and insert all the remaining part according to roundness, and stop the urine.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And accordingly insert into the part underneath the cord of the testicles by section of which blood and pus will flow as we have recommended in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And accordingly apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and pause there; and apply the thread which we have recommended (and sometimes the white apron is cauterized, which we have said should be done at the incision of the wound to prevent blood flow, because many times those apostemes occur) and let the thread fall into place.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the mistake of him is delayed, then accordingly cold water should be poured, and pause over that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly cure the wound with another cure of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been burnt by the cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; which is that you tie the vessels accordingly at the section on that side with felicitous ease; and accordingly cut in the middle location around the aposteme with water that brings about that, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the Disproportion that is made in the Navel.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the navel just as we have said, and protrudes the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no reason for the genitals to be affected by the intestines at the genitalia; and if there is, it is slight; and returns to its normal state in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there is an opening in the apron into which the intestine descends; and this occurs because of the extension of the apron which is in the navel just as we have said, which cause is that the apron is stretched, and accordingly it becomes softened and the location apostematises and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for this is with a cauterizing tool just as the narrative of this has described.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between his thighs, and accordingly cuts the location of the rupture of the apostemes protruding by section along the width in a quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And accordingly strengthen the white apron that is underneath the cord, until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And accordingly take the reed and pause it over the protruding location of the apron, and press it against the belly's fold.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And accordingly close the two protruding locations on the tip of the reed of the apron, and adjust them with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And accordingly extract the tip of the reed, and do not insert it into the apron completely, nor extend the urine, nor any other cause just as you would want to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And accordingly cure that with the cure of wounds, and by inserting the threads, cleanse it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the apron has contracted and the protrusion of rupture has not been adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, since it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between that is softened, and it is fitting for him to take care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is taking care of him in his cure to make the patient lie on his back, and insert all the softened cord which is above the natural cord into it; and accordingly adjust two lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And accordingly insert between the sutures; and accordingly cure by curing of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it is written to me that I remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remind of it except by two manners, of which one is because of what this is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is asked about it, knowing the cure for him who suffers from it; and the other manner is that many times we have needed castration of other animals for our uses through them, just as with horses, and bulls, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: either by emasculation, or by incision at the section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by emasculation, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie down in cold water until its genitalia are softened and relaxed, and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And accordingly take them with the help of your hand into where they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind by the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And accordingly tie the suspenders, and cut on each side with one incision until two incisions process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And accordingly cut those more than you would have excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those of the apron, except for the subtle apron which is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better which is done by emasculation, because emasculation leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On The Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men is according to two manners: the one is when it appears as a space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure like that of a woman's vulva.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from it flows urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, there is a species: and it is that the vulva of a woman on her pubic mound is like two testicles of a man, almost all of them being placed outside just as the male genitalia are.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: two of men and one of women's.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must insert those adjusted flesh into where it escapes the impression of that, and accordingly cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine flows which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On Swelling and Flesh Elevation due to Causes of Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling is slightly adjusted on natural causes until it becomes exhausted and makes the regulation firm; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and penetrates into coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore it is necessary for you to take the excess of swelling with your hand or with a tool and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop in inserting, especially at the pubic region, so that there may not be a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrificity of the mare until it fills it, and slightly rises to the outer parts according to the shape of a hen (and for this reason some first call this "diseased swelling"); therefore it is necessary for us to insert as we insert swelling, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On The Cure of Ulceration.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Ulceration is when the vulva of a woman is not perforated, or if it is slightly torn.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not being adjusted or by subtle apron or thick apron.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the pubic region of the mare, or in its sides, or at the highest part of it, or at the lowest part of it, and prohibits coitus and engagement and childbearing, and very much prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by observation of the uterus, if the opacity is apparent, you can diagnose; but if it is not apparent, you must search for it with those said fingers or with a reed.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opacity is due to subtle apron and is placed on both lips, then you must cut and tear it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause over the two lips of dust, and accordingly pause those said indications on both sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her arms extended, and accordingly extend both lips with force until that subtle apron is broken and the opacity is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And accordingly take linen and soak it in oil and pause that over the location, and make the patient lie down at home for a day so that the inserted location is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the apron is thick and dense, it is necessary for you to insert that with a spatula or with a mulberry leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opacity is due to edema, then suspend that with a tool, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And be familiar with the medicines that stop bleeding without causing injury, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and essence, adjusted with white of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And accordingly administer a leaden cannula that is wide enough so that the wound does not become slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen in the natural birth of other flesh, and accordingly it is necessary to insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to gangrenous aposteme, there should not be any opposition with iron in any manner at the aposteme which is in the mare.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On The Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tail and Red Botch that occur in the Vulva of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a swelling of the orifices of many veins until those vessels are corrupted and continue to bleed continuously; and as old hemorrhoids become worse and are made worse by their throats.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and will say also which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and throats when they are in the pubic region of the mare and do not appear to the sense, then in those there should not be made cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifice of the mare above which one can sense, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and accordingly extend her thighs with forceps, or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And accordingly powder is spread over those to dry the flows of blood from one of the insertive powders that cause no injury, such as aconite and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And accordingly press her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make that person sit in a decoction of Sumatra and Scorzonera of millet, and Gualas and similar plants.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And accordingly take wheat flour and mix it with honey, vinegar, and make a poultice with water on the back of him.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is absorbed, it is good; and otherwise, make adhere two bellows to the breasts with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly take linen and submerge that in the juice of Colocynthis or in the juice of Arnoglossum or in the juice of Guaiacum mixed with vinegar, and make adhere to the location; and accordingly cure the location with poultices until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if the thigh is rough and harsh, it is necessary for you to insert that which appears to you from that according to what I have said in the equal part.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On The Perforation of Accidental Wound in the Mare.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of accidental wounds occur in the mare, such as gangrenous and apostematic, ulcerative and adhesion-like, erpetromenous and fistulous hemorrhoids, and rough and other apostemats.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their species, and their signs, and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary for you to say in this treatise of gangrenous aposteme which occurs in the mare when one of the apostemats is healthy, and if you want to know how the operation is done on him with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is necessary for you to consider if the pain of the aposteme in its beginning is acute with percussion and fluxing and fever, and sometimes that colorizes and if one senses on that location a sensation, then do not cut with perforation of him, and cure that with water that helps on maturity until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And accordingly it is necessary for you to make the woman lie down on a pillow that has two pillows; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the lowest part of the belly, and her thighs be expanded, and pause her arms below her nails, and tie each one with a string to water conveniently.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And accordingly the midwife should follow the right way and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mare is covered, the form of which will come in those causes that are done accordingly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And accordingly when you want to administer this instrument, make sure that it is in the ray of the pubic region of the mare of the woman, and what enters the instrument into the mare does not exceed the pubic region of the mare and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the pubic region of the mare, then it is necessary for you to sprinkle powder on the texture of the pubic region of the mare so that it prohibits the entry of any instrument into the pubic region of the mare.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And accordingly you should pause the vertebra that runs on the instrument above and below, and the one who ministers should hold the instrument and turn the vertebra until it is opened the opening of the mare.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and it is touched by the hand and is rough and moist, then it is necessary for you to dry that with a spatula of fat.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary for you to pause in the wound a poultice submerged in red oil or green oil which has some styptic properties; and pause the pressure in the section of the pubic region of the mare.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pause outside the mare and on the pubic mound a clean linen cloth submerged in water in which marigolds are steeped.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly be cured within two days with poultices that correspond to that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mare and the wound are washed in this way that is anointed with water and honey, and accordingly with water in which rye or long-leafed Aristolochia has been steeped, and then returns to poultices.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is opened in the mare with pus, then it is necessary for you to be prohibited from the cure of him with iron, having cured that with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to medicate abnormal births when they occur according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should know at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and thus when you see the woman expelling at the parting points below and desires to smell the air, and on top of that she is relaxed because what comes out of her is from the part, and hastens the emergence of the fetus, then you should know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emergence of the baby over its head, and the umbilical cord with that or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, as you see those signs, then it is necessary for the belly of him to be compressed so that the fetus descends slightly when it comes out over its head, and then the umbilical cord should be cut off from those superfluous parts with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another part is non-natural and not permissible, because when the fetus is emerged over its feet and the body of him is emerged before his head and his feet, and one hand or at the foot.1 or is emerged the head of him and one hand or at the belly of him, and very much it is converted over his neck, and similar to the figures of him that are not permissible.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to beware of error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show you the whole figure of those, and what engine is in them for so that it is meant by this and stands on top.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is emerged over its head by natural excitement, and it is very vehement on the woman and is made to part difficultly, and sometimes the virtue of her is already debilitated, then make that person sit down, or what women have him, and evaporate the vulva with fennel juice and with warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And accordingly introduce the midwife between the said small spatula and the slit with that umbilical cord, or cut that off with her own nail until the flow of water is in her which is in her of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until it descends the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be anointed with mullein and fenugreek juice mixed with camomile.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And accordingly command him to her, and command the anointing, that it be compressed and make her yawn with conditions; and hold his mouth and nose for one hour, because the child will soon forget it.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary to reduce those with small ease gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a pillow and lift her feet up, and accordingly conceive the pillow on the earth; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned and the child dies, then insert those and extract the remnant of the child or tie its body to the hand with cloth and extract that in equanimity, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the Emergence of the Fetus over the Feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child emerges over its feet, then it is necessary to push those into them, and accordingly transform the small child, and accordingly equalize that, and accordingly take one foot of him and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are emerged into the thighs, then it is necessary to command him to be expelled, and make her yawn with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then it is necessary to return the small child gradually until he is paused according to a natural figure, because that will soon be forgotten with a lighter emergence.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited with all that we have recounted, then take mullein and dissolved gum, and beat everything together in the mortar for good beating, and accordingly line up with water the vulva of the woman, down below the belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And accordingly make that person sit in warm water until she achieves relief from her hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts below of him are softened, then make to him a sub-fumigation of myrtle and sub-pause that to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation has been done for an hour, then make her sit down on a pillow, and accordingly make her yawn and stretch her mouth, and take that away from her, and press the lower part of the belly of her with light compression, because the child will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Emergence of the Child over its Fingernails and Hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child emerges in this form, then you should gently push in his small hands little by little; and accordingly the woman should be laid down on her back, with her feet hanging down, and those [hands] should be lying on the light, and complete his hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And accordingly press on the belly of her little by little, and accordingly extract out what is left from the feet up to the ears until it is prepared in the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not forgotten, then take his feet and move them vigorously with those, and accordingly press that which is on the hypochondria little by little until the child can reach the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And accordingly enter his hands and equalize the child little by little, and command the woman to be expelled until the child is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Emergence of the Child Lateralistically Hanging from One of His Hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be gentle in reducing the hand of him, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and conceive the thighs of him with strong concussion, and accordingly administer those remedies which we have recounted and recommended with mullein.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth is completed, then make her sit down on a pillow, and accordingly study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the child according to natural figure, and make the woman yawn and command him to compress himself until he is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Emergence of the Child with expanded hands and the flesh of him at the two sides of his right shoulder.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary for the midwife to have the hand of the child and accordingly turn that little by little, and equalize that with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and what is equalized, then pause on the vulva of her with that which we have recounted, namely oil and mullein.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And accordingly command him to yawn little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit down on a pillow and command her to be inclined over the right side, and accordingly command him to be compressed; and make her yawn with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the prepared fetus onto the right side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it emerges in a horrible manner from the mare according to this method, take note, and then insert the umbilical cord with your own nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of him, then insert that of the umbilical cord, in order that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And accordingly push the child into the parts below until it is paused according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself for some time, and if God wills it, the child will soon be forgotten with a lighter emergence.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that sometimes twins are born, and some times three or four, but this is rare and not to be expected; however, there are causes natural, and not living.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, whether they are multiple or single, one umbilical cord, and they are separated by ciphac, distinguish them from the ligament in the navel of each of those And some times they are forgotten thus as one fetus for natural emergence lighter, and some times they are born with non-natural emergence thus as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver and proceed to what we have said about non-natural figures, then you should cure those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and in delay, and is skilled according to all figures as it is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and Aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some weeks are formed in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten days; and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman aborts at the seventh day, and another at the tenth day, which was caused by measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this must be in the science of the midwife because it is a little similar to what has been said, and therefore pause there as much as is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of the Fetus when it is Dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not yet emerged, and you are forced to use operation by hand, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has a healthy virtue and is not afflicted with any of the accidents by which peril is feared for her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be laid down on her back over the bed, and her head inclined downwards, and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her in two parts or be tied down on the bed for that reason, so that the body of her does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And accordingly moisten the mouth of the mare with warm oil, and mullein, and fenugreek, and sesame seed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And accordingly the midwife should bring her hand with those oils and mullein, and accordingly enter her hand with ease into the mare, and accordingly seek out the exact location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And finding the convenient location: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to emerge on its head, and accordingly place your fingers in the following locations: on the ears of him, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furcula of him, or in the places proper to the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the emergence is on the feet of him, then in the pentalion or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to have the fingers of the right hand and pause the curvature of him at that location which is between the digits of the left hand, and enter the hand with ease and place the fingers in one of those locations which we have said, until you reach the cause of the boyd.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And accordingly pause and place another finger, or the third if necessary, in the opposition of him, to attract equalization, and not be extended according to his straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it will be good for the whole part, for that reason the emergence of him will be alleviated thus as is done in tooth extraction for the eradication of him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in him that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if some part of him is retained, then the midwife should bring some of his fingers with oil and enter those expertly and turn with water what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers should be pushed forward until the location where it is more above; and make so that all the fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is emerged before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of him, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and accordingly extract that until all is forgotten, and insert it either in the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is contraction in the emergence, or if water is adjusted in the head of him, then it is necessary that you insert between the digits a spatula with spines and cut off the head and extract the water, or use an instrument which is called "alundat", whose form will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the fetus has a large head by nature: and it is necessary that you insert it with an algemate, or take it with an alundat as we have said; and accordingly extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is emerged and contracted at the furcula, then it should be cut open until the humidity which is in the pit is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obedient to emergence, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the afterbirth of the belly is apoplectic or is in him with dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate that until the humidity which is in him flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of him is slight and the direction of him to the mouth of the mare is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is contracted in the belly and pit, then it is necessary that you extract that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and cut open the belly and pit until the water that is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are stiff and turn back to the head, then put your right hand into it; but if the mouth of the mare is swollen, then insert your left hand into the harp and seek out that head, and attract it with the fingers until it enters the mouth of the mare, and accordingly enter one finger or two fingers into him and draw him with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mare is contracted by apoplectic catarrh which happens to him, then it is necessary that you do not trouble him with this; but rather administer effusion of humid and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then if possible, it should be punctured: and administer water as we have said in the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be inserted into pessaries, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause behind the umbilical cord.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer water as we have said for the cure of apoplectic catarrh which happens to the mare.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then administer in aqueous stiptics and give the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman in whose womb was a dead fetus, and accordingly on that spot another embryo conceived, and accordingly the dead fetus is another.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him, accordingly, after a long time an apoplectic catarrh in his navel; and it swelled until a foul odor began to emit.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called upon to cure him, and treated him for a long time, and the wound was not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you applied some emplasters of strong attraction to him, and extracted from him one bone, and accordingly passed several days, and extracted another bone; and I was too astonished, as in the womb there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you cleansed the wound, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in her own miserable condition, and already living in such a way for a long time, cried out with a little breast.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider it strange, but rather because in that is science and aid to what the physician has in his hand to administer cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertebrae with which the mare is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which are equated the free ones, to which equating are two vertebrae at the two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this vertebra must be more subtle than the strictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the latitude of each foot is about two digits and the margin of each about one digit, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle part of the two feet are two adjustments of those fixed feet, which are already secured, of which the length is the majority of one palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is about two digits, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the mare so that it is opened with them when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two adjustments like those times, and the length of these adjustments is about one palm, and the latitude of each is two digits.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mare with those, then you should cause the woman to sit on a bed with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And accordingly, over your hand with the instrument as you make it for forceps equalizing according to the quantity you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mare until she makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertebrae which was said by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulse by which the fetus is impelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of accommodation by which the great head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which has teeth at the end, just like times, and some times it is made long just like forceps according to this form, just like times, with teeth just like teeth of a reed into which it is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of accommodation few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of finger having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of finger having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps by which the teeth of a comb are contained, into which the head of the fetus is inserted.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities at which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of that are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, as it is easier to their operation and more necessary for men in proportion.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments however small they may seem to you, because the necessity of them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction of the umbilical cord.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the umbilical cord is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary that you order the patient to retain her breath, and accordingly make her cough with conditions, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if by this means it is extracted, well it is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a cloth and pierce it in the covering of a hole, and pause in that herb which is used to open the mouth of the mare, such as calamus and rue and anise and chamomile and Arab spices and cassia lignea and St. Andrew's.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And accordingly place a reed cane in the mouth of the mare, and keep it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mare.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And accordingly make her cough just as we have said, and the umbilical cord is expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure does not work and the umbilical cord is still retained, then you should order the midwife to submerge her left hand in samian oil or in a mixture of altaic herbs, and accordingly insert it into the confluence and seek out the umbilical cord, and when you have found it, take it and stretch it out gradually. But if it is annexed in the womb of the mare, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the umbilical cord, extract it little by little according to rectitude, so that the mare does not faint from the vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	But first, it is necessary to be made pliable on both right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And accordingly, it should be adjusted in the quantity of attraction, because it will obey and escape from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mare is contracted, we have already recommended the cure by coughing and administering medicine with the cloth and herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recommended, then beware that you do not force anything over there in iteration of abstraction, but rather, it is necessary that what has emerged from him to the mouth of the mare lies at the edge of the woman's bed, and accordingly, plasterize it with a poultice and tetra-pharmacopeia; because that will make it rot away within a few days and be dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, it is elevated to a bad authority on the head and stomach, and accordingly leads the patient astray; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to him.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already experimented with sub-fumigation using nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated for retention of menstruation and umbilical cord:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Be made of bay or earthenware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And be placed the slender extremity in the cleft and the broad extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that until the sub-fumigation is consumed and then iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure for the child's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born without anuses, those which have a subtle and opaque covering.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that subtle covering with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the lacet.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And accordingly, pause over that with wool infused in vinegar and oil; and accordingly, cure it with a poultice until it is settled.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then pause in the hole a reed cane for many days, and stop when the child will desire to relieve itself.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is obstruction of the anus due to consolidation of wound or apoplectic catarrh; then it is necessary that this consolidation be incised, and accordingly be cured with the water we have said for the cure and with lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of cure for the fistulae which are left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulae which are left behind in the departure, and which are lower than the navel and thicker on the one side or in the space of the one part, near the anus.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a single fistula or several.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is old and flows with white or yellowish liquid, or subtle putridation, and sometimes some of these fistulae are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrating are known by what comes out of them through egression and ventosity; and sometimes the patient uses the evacuation of egression, and very little comes out of those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulae occasionally penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra of the penis; and some of those penetrating into the junction of the pelvis and into the notch of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to know if a penetrating fistula is not penetrating is that you put your finger into the anus and then insert a subtle probe of earthenware or iron into the fistula when there is no resistance.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is resistance in that, then insert into it a subtle probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all or there is no discharge of any kind, whether worms or wind, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and accordingly apply the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra of the penis, then the significance of it is that urine will come out of that and prohibition of it at this point so that the place with medicine may be consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the pelvis or bone and causing pain in the circulation, then the sign of it is that the probe will go in here if there is no resistance to the bone, and causing pain in the circulation of the departure; and that from it always putridation appears; and that no remedy is valid in that, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulae there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is tedious and futile labor on the part of foolish doctors who are fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recommended, and what you have already proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between two cushions over his back and elevates his legs up to them, so that the pelvis are inclined towards the belly of him, and accordingly insert a probe of lead or earthenware into the fistula if there is resistance, until you know the place where the probe will go in.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that makes the patient feel a sensation around the anus, then it is necessary that you put your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already gone in and is penetrating, or if you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and accordingly do not trouble yourself with it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But yet some say that it cures in some people at times.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which one hopes for improvement in that is that you apply a subtle cauterizing fire according to the size of the fistula, as has been previously said, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and accordingly repeat that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted fleshy tissues that are similar to the quill of an eagle have become united.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And accordingly cure that with wrapped calkins in parchment until all those adjusted fleshy tissues are united, and accordingly cure that with medicines generating and consolidating flesh, and if it is healed, well it is; and otherwise, then it is not healed at any time by other cures.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe goes in and does not penetrate into the anus which is in the rectum, and between that and the probe which is a velament of flesh or nodule, and sometimes the fistula opens up on the surface of the codena, then dry out the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and be in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe goes in, and by the probe is liberated and freed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And accordingly, purify those fleshy tissues which are assembled like the quill of an eagle and do not remain for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if the flow of blood comes and goes between you and your operation when you are purifying those fleshy tissues, then use the remedy that is easiest to apply with the least effort, which is cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts two good habits: so it adjusts the adjusted fleshy tissues, and abscizes the blood by excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And accordingly cure that with wrapped calkins in parchment or in threefold cloth until the wound gets braised, and accordingly cure the wound with poultices of hard flesh that generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines in which there is astringency and excess; when that is restored it is healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already gone into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the probe and it is between you and her a velament of nodule or flesh, and is inclined towards penetration, then there is no operation in that but according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Which cause is to be administered in that place by one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry out that part until you achieve the conquest of it so that it becomes possible for you to insert some and the natural cure is achieved; and do not proceed with any drying out because you will not inscribe the lacert containing the anus, and it will occur over the patient's consent; and accordingly cure that with water as we have said, which will be quite healthy; or elongate that velament and dry out that part up to the prop of the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and accordingly purify those fleshy tissues that are in the section until you can make an incision; and accordingly strive to restore all the wound with drying out, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open on the side of the anus, and it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases the fistula is closed by this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the anus around the surface of the body with the codena and on the margin of the anus, then take hold of a perforated extremity, which is like an awl that prepares the skin according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that faithful wrapping of vein or around those; and accordingly insert the probe with faith in the fistula until you achieve the conquest of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating into the margin of the anus proper to the inside, then you take out the vein from that hole as if you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave water for a day or two, and when more you insert the vein into the flesh, strengthen it until those fleshy tissues are inserted between the two extremities of the vein which fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And accordingly cure the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you have prepared for it, but not so much that it reaches the anus, because it is not your business to do that; and accordingly make it healed with water as we have said.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is punctured: its curvature is very sharp on one side and not sharp at all on the other side, so that you do not insert what is not necessary, just like sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of stitching of hemroids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemroids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus resembling like those of charcoal, or those which are like a grass of rashes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them always and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little moisture, from which flows a yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous pus, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is outside the anus is to command the patient to settle down and to be expelled into the anus until the anus opens and the hemroids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you will cut and suspend with scissors or whatever you have those on your fingernail, and accordingly cut off the roots of those.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the scissors are not taken to those because of the humidity and softening of them, then take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of cotton or with a woolen rag, and pull out those with the aforementioned fingers, and accordingly cut off those and powder some powders on top of them nearby the incision, so that they are adapted to those in place of cauterization; or cauterize those as it is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And accordingly cure those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then cleanse the patient with a small amount of cistern in the cistern where there is slight biting, and wash him with that water that is in the anus and that will obey evacuation slightly when the patient is evacuated.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemroids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take those with your fingernail or with scissors, and cut off those, and accordingly cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And whoever will have incision, should administer suture of theirs according to this method: take a faithful wrapping and insert that into the needle and accordingly pull out the hemroids at the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread in the part most left behind of the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemroid with a strong stitch, and accordingly remove the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this with all of them, and leave one of those alone and do not cook it, so that the superfluity of blood flows from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And accordingly place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the anus, and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly leave that until it is hardened, and when it has hardened, cure those with poultices or with another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	The Cure of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times it happens by excess of a wound or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are so old and not valid in that medicine, then you must scrape those with the point of a spatula or with your fingernail until they become moist and the scab above is prevented from forming; and accordingly cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must scrape those with reason more violent than the first time until there is no blood and they are exfoliated; and accordingly cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The Cure of Almesmir, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that Almesmir is the key, and it is not so unless there are notes redone according to the color of the body resembling a head of clavicle, and it is made throughout the body and most in the parts left behind the weights and the dits, and thereby one must follow the pain through the love.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut off that which is in the circle of the key, and be held with forceps or scissors, and be eradicated from its root; and accordingly cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But of verruca is a small rough wart-like prominence that is fistulated and rounded on the surface of the body, and many times it appears in children's hands.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for that is to spread and cut off that, or to strengthen it with a thread or with a cloth until it hardens.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated inwardly and outwardly with the instrument that you will say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a formic is a small prominence that is fatty or fistulated large on the surface of the body moving towards the anus, and when the heat finds it, it appears like a biting of an ant, and is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a quill of goose or of wolverine, and it be strong, and place it on the formic until it contains the circle of the quill around the parts of it; and accordingly revolve your hand with the quill until you cut off what is in the circuit of the formic, and place it in the anus of the flesh, and thereby eradicate the formic from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a clay or iron quill according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Be the upper part of the quill thin and subtle, not perforated, wrapped in such a way that on the said part of it is ablated and the rotation of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the ant according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterizing.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The Form of the Instruments that are administered to give Cistern.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cistern is made of silver or lead or clay melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made with small and large instruments according to those which are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children is small; and of those whose anus is rough or painful, their cisterns are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Form of Cistern Great and Little.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the quill above, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this method; and there should be a distinction at the place where the bag is tied just like sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it most below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (so it is not open) very much like a lion, going back to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger than small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag should be in which medicines from the bladder of an animal or from sheep's wool are placed, and the root of it should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with many holes just like it is rolled up; and if the space which is between the holes is as thick as said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And accordingly insert into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads, or around those; and adjust the bag with that; and when it is placed in there the bag should be tight at the head of the cistern between two distinct parts with strong constriction, and accordingly cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And accordingly the patient should be raised over his back, and lift his legs up high and place something flat underneath it on which men or a lansol rest; and accordingly anoint the extremity of the cauter with oil or album of wheat or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and accordingly insert that into the anus with ease, and accordingly the minister should take the bag and expel that with two hands and sometimes with vehemence until it is evacuated in the bedpan all that is in the cistern; and accordingly remove the cistern and the patient will lift his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to sleep, let him sleep as long as he can; and if he sleeps with that all night, it is even later in judgment.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize that in diseases of stool evacuation and the patient's sleep is disturbed, then you must repeat the cauterization until he is cured.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemroids or apoplastic lesions, then you should use a cistern that is very subtle and lion-like, from among those with which children are cisternized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	The Cure of Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And so I have said in the division of the cure of plagues what is necessary for the free man, and I say thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that plagues are diversified according to what the plagues are made and according to the place on which the plagues are placed.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times plagues are made are just like a blow of pepper, or incision of space or of cote, or percussion with lance, or with fist, or with arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are like a plague which lies on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the cure for some plagues by which you pause that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the plagues of the head, simple ones, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the fourth chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow of pepper or similar, and if the wound has already opened up just a little bit and it is a big plague and you fear that there may be an apostema forming, then you should take care of it and perform cephalic bleeding as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract blood from it according to the quantity of its virtue, unless there are other causes prohibiting bleeding, especially if the blood that has flowed out of the plague is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And perform the bleeding on the opposite side of the affected part; and beware that the patient does not get filled up with blood, nor eat nor drink strong foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any prohibition from the minority, then it should be reduced in food and not approach meat nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the plague, if an apostema is forming cautiously, apply oil of roses or wine in which it is stipticated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that an apostema is forming cautiously, then place on the plague, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommended earlier in small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then place on it some poultice until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is great or is due to incision of space and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pus, then adjust those with a suture according to how I recommend for the suturing of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague has already been discovered from the bone and pen, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensor, then cut off that and accordingly cure the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in its proper place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grossness: caps and forms like theirs, until they are composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut off all that putrid part and remove it, and accordingly cure what remains.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not abscessed by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that one which is not abscessed, then cut off that with a spatula or tie it; and if necessity demands that what we have said does not come to pass, then you should cauterize in order for the blood to be abscessed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; therefore you can powderize on those this powder, for it will consolidate that before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil from a dragon's wound, one part, blood of a dragon, two parts, and non-extinguished charcoal, three parts; mix it all well and grind it finely, and fill the wound with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres well to that place, and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly strengthen that above with poultices and apply it, and do not remove it while it is like this, for the medicine has not yet been absorbed by it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes make this alone, when you are not present with dragon's blood and dragon's wound.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And then do this same operation on large wounds when it is necessary to pause over those and compress them, and on fresh wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the time of summer, then you should not think about the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, by applying poultices that are suitable for them, or by applying fine powder made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until a poultice forms; and accordingly cure those with another remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it occurs in a fracture of the bone, and is small, then you should extract that with gauze.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the cure for fractures of the head in this way which follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is injured, then if it is a nerve, do not intervene with poultice, but rather avoid curing it with anything that causes vehement stiptication, just like vinegar and egg whites, which are like vitriol and similar to theirs, which hurt the nerves and contract that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply anything to the wound that is too cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is in the brain, which is the highest part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if the wound is cured with gentle medicines, just as it is washed with lukewarm water, some times infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and thus when it is washed with lukewarm water and other parts are softened according to this manner, and poultices moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer a suture, or tie off the edges of it, and accordingly cure that with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the poultice, then pierce that in the most suitable location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery has been cut in the wound and blood is flowing, then separate or dry it out, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessity demands that too.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have been cut or all, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; above equalize that and reduce it to its natural shape, and accordingly strengthen that with decent stricture, and leave it for a few days; and accordingly cure that with poultices in which there is stiptication and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then pierce it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can from them; and what is not removable, leave that until the wound settles, and be separate and the excrescence from it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then powderize over it with the powder that I recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if there is a fistula in the wound, then cure that with what will be remembered later in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the vertebrae and is made with space or with a cote or with a lance or with similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow from a lance or a cote and sometimes the depth of the wound, then consider more if there is ventilation in the wound when the patient breathes; know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it at the first hour, and not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and aches the patient, but rather pause on it an attractive poultice, and remove it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not present, then you should pause on the orifice of the wound with a cloth so that it sucks out what there is of the humidities; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that the water that is in it is adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasm nor trembling of the heart nor constriction of the artery, and sometimes other good dispositions from it, then know that the wound is saved; and accordingly cure that with cauterization and another remedy until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is delayed, and all time has opened up, then know that a fistula has been formed; cure then that according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to incision of space or cote, and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with what has preceded it by suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has made an impression in the bone, and there are fragments of bone, then pierce the wound and extract those fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound settles, so that the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for other wounds that occur in other limbs, the judgment in curing is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great, sometimes you find the bowels or nerves of the bowels, because an intrusion has been made and the suture of them is more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and you must know that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to put their intrusion back into its place soon, for it opens up and becomes engorged so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that one there is no difficulty in reducing the bowels, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are necessary in sutures of other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures proper communicate with the other wounds, but nevertheless are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you any exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowels has been made by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is done in one of two manners: or by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the bowels have become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this is so, it is necessary that you scrape that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or that you soak it in water with squinant, and cypress, and spic, and wrap the bowels around that until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I find that this has a stiptic quality, and it is better than hot water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you find that the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the bowels with water in which there are high and bitter roots, for by this the instrument of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument of it is not suitable for this cure, then you should divide the disruption into small parts with an instrument which has been sharpened by cutting bloodless wounds.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper and not too dry, and there is no occupation in drying out too much necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see the shape of it:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one part of it is twisted sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not so subtle as a spatula, but rather obtuse a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is enlarged and the bowels are outside, it is necessary that their reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible above, for better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his hips higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head of him and his feet higher than the remaining parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your intention and consideration at that point for so long as the part in which the wound is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And similarly it is necessary that you administer this to great wounds and middling wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause on what is prepared for you, and then make the minister to be between your most trusted servants, one who has the disruption all with his hand and adjusts the edges of it, and then uncover from that to that which knows some cause another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count the needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, so that you do not put faith in the two ends of the cord, with the two ends of the ciphac that is left outside the cord, until it penetrates from that part; and you have already added two ends of the cord and two ends of the ciphac, and thus four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And accordingly strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and accordingly add the two edges and the wound by decent addition; and accordingly leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that place, and accordingly tie that with a thread as if it were a first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed all the constriction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be middling between coarseness and subtlety, because the fine needles barely cut into the flesh; and the coarse ones are of difficult instrument in the cord, and therefore it is necessary that they be middling in subtlety and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted in both ends of the cord at once, for fear that the flesh will be cut too little and the wound will become inflamed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suturing so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And accordingly insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's rest in his bed; and pause on the suturing with poultices spread out from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suture with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, because they suffice in the suture of them with one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped evenly in subtlety and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And accordingly, when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, reduce the needle to that middle part from which it began, in order that the thread may be pulled back from the most elevated part of the wound to the wound itself, in order that the suture may be according to the suture of cloth with which the cloths are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I cured the wound which had occurred to a man in his belly, which was wounded with a cote, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the bowel from the middle location, and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that from where the bowel had been perforated by the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he is healed; and accordingly, he lived for many years and was converted to his former disposition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle of God, for you did not cure him with poultice, because it was in a place where poultice was not found nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound with a cloth twice a day and ablution assiduous with water of honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell two species of suture proper, according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the cord, and insert the needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore, as the needle pierces into the cord and meets the lacertz according to rectitude and length of all the body, and leaves the end of the ciphac in which you inserted the needle; and make it penetrate on the other side through the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the mihat.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then, when you have made it penetrate once, you should make it penetrate again on the same side in that middle extremity of the mihat from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the ciphac which is in this position, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity of the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with that penetration of yours, with which you make it penetrate into the ciphac in the extremity of the mirror, which is on the part of it, until all of that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And accordingly, begin on this side of the said cord and cut off that which is at the end of the ciphac in the other side, and pull out the needle from the cord which penetrated, and accordingly reduce it to that cord and tie the end of the ciphac which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and pull out that part of the cord which is on the part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another time, and do it again one more time, until you cut off all that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you cut off with a suture of skin, in which you cut off the skin, and so that you cut off the ciphac once on one side of the extremity of the cord, and then leave it there until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of suture proper, which you call Gualia, and this is according to the word of God and by his recommendation, is that you cut off according to semilitut with which some medics cut it off, in such a way that they add all parts to their corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of one side of it and the extremity of the mirror to another extremity of it, and this is done according to what you recommend to yourself.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own part from the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside in that same one, and leave two ends of the ciphac; and accordingly revolve the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the two ends of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And accordingly, revolve those loops and make them penetrate from the inside to the outside in the two ends of the mirror, which are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture which was previously remembered.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And besides, some will say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these two one thread, and begin with the introduction of a needle from what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who cut off the skins evenly.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other locations of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medicine for a wound is judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you succeed in the wound recently with the patient's blood before it has altered that, and reduce the belly and cut off that and adapt that decently, then pause over that flesh-powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that some poultices which are at your presence until they make a hard pressure and loosen the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and accordingly cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at your presence, then pause over that for some time, since it begins to grow hard, and cut off, and exchange that twice a day, just as I teach you, until it is healed, because you will not need other medication in many situations when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may communicate to lesions in the main members, then it is necessary that you soak linen in good quality oil of tempering or rose oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places which are between the angles and leave those as they are.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your bowels, because many times this happens to be so, then it is necessary that you sterilize that with vinegar stiptic black water, and especially if the perforation has occurred in the bowel and has made an exit hole penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that what is from the large bowel is more easily healed than what is in the small bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the bowel which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that enters into it completely; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude, and because of the subtlety of the body of it, and because of its proximity to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is a thread, and you succeed in getting it recently, then reduce that according to your rectitude with which you reduce the bowels evenly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with thread on the location that is degraded from there, in order to bring back the flow of blood, because in the thread are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And accordingly, insert there what is another binding, and pause the two ends of the thread pending from the left side of the wound, in order that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it from the cavity of the wound and emission of the flesh of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, because you saw that one who was wounded in his belly with a blow from a lance and had an old wound and made a fistula, and exuding pus and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you began to treat the wound as if it were not confined in its healing, but rather ceased to be subtle and allowed that to be healed and the location to be consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And then you saw that the location was already consolidated, and you waited for the patient who had been injured in his belly; and he did not take any medicine because of this bad accident and remained in his usual habits eating and drinking, and accordingly went to the bath and was exercised in his own strength.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones will say that when you encounter a wound in the bowel and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take fromies of large caps; and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound and pause one fromie of those which has an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; therefore when you place it on top of them and strengthen its mouth, cut off the cap of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And accordingly, pause another fromie near the first one, and do not cease to make fromies one by one according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And accordingly, reduce that and close the wound; and those caps remain attached in the bowel until the bowel is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And already it is possible to bind the bowel with a subtle thread which is made from the bowel of an animal attached to it, because it is more in needle; and it is that you take the end of these threads from the bowel, and it is very bare, and accordingly tie the end of it to the thread of binding, wrapped, and accordingly insert that thread into the needles and close with it on the bowel, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with fromies is nothing but according to the way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the small bowels, because then it is not just a matter of suture, but rather subtlety, and there is no healing of it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the cure of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and apostema when it becomes old and antiquated, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and grows a hard crust all the time and is not cut off, then, regardless of what member it may be in, universally it is called fistula and we call it abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a nodular abscess, hard, white, and painless, with which there is no pain and it is as if the cavity of the abscess were the penalty of the owl; and for this reason they called that "rizatz", i.e. penalty.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men moist, which grows a crust; and the moisture is soon absorbed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is more abundant, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I already mentioned it in the division, when you said that all ulcers which are not healed or are not in bare flesh, there is only one of these causes: either because of a lack of blood in the body; or because of malice towards oneself; or because there is hard skin between it and the lips preventing the growth of new skin; or because it is too old; or because that ulcer within itself putsrefies and the material that is transmitted to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in the healing of it; or when corruption breeds in the region, and it is pestilence; or due to the property of the region as is the case in Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult and healing of apostemas is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And now I have shown all those causes, and their signs, and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that you know how to treat fistulas which are made by way of operation with me.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body, because some are fistulas that penetrate into the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the ciphac, or the bowel, or the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the joints composed by composition as is the case with the hand and foot; and those are which give proximity to the main member and its likenesses.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the difficult-to-heal diseases, and does not receive healing, and its occupation with it is toil and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some of the fistulas have a depth that does not reach those places I mentioned, and you wait and hope for its healing, and wish to understand it, then take a try with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows the natural path, then explore it with the finger.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead, because lead with the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved in such a way that it follows the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many horrible appearances, it is not possible for you to signify on it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clean the orifice by its own orifices, because the moisture which you use to cleanse it flows through the other orifices and drains from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And accordingly, inquire exquisitely, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the fistula is distant or near, or if it is one of those many orifices that is situated above this entire sum of your strength, with your introspection, with which you reflect on the patient, and the invention of pain due to your compression with your hand on the location, and similar signs and causes of accidents affecting the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with steadfast true understanding, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salubrious location, distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I teach you and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And now you should cleanse the fistula according to what was said before about the narration of it, and stop at that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or from the bone and its likenesses, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long and deep depth, and follows its natural path, then you must insert it into the preon as far as possible for you, and accordingly, cleanse that from all its corrupted flesh; and accordingly, administer some wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And thus, with that, make it so some times until the sharp medicine has corroded all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, restore that with unguents which produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain about it, then you should inquire into that and cleanse it according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is uncovered to you and it has some corruption and blackness, then you should remove that until all the corruption is removed; and accordingly, cure that with water which enters into it until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and grows crust like before, then you should know that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption; and therefore, you will uncover it again, carefully and exquisitely, make a reason for it and cleanse it with the last strength left in you, and accordingly restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore, if it is healed, good it is; and otherwise, you should know that this corruption is in the deep and distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and thus there is nothing for you to do but to leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to attract it, then you should attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you should make the extraction of all those, and leave no cause for any reason with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you find any cause of the moistures which is contrary to your intention, and in its insight there is no fear or error, then you should insert those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones of your time, then pause over that wound which is causing the wound to fester, and leave it until that wound is in the environs of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have inserted into your operation is constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	They have it, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in soap with oil, or wound submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green unguents, because when those ligaments putrefy, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone like the bone of the hip or the coccyx or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then you should remove that with scissors only as far back as necessary until that blackness and corruption is removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close it and insert all into the location where the corruption has spread, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you approach one man in his own coccyx, so that you may pause over it and assist with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about thirty years old, who feels pain in his coccyx, and the parts inside are swollen on the material inside the body until the material reaches the coccyx, and it is a matter of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And thus, the time was extended by the mistake of doctors until the apostema was hubert, and there was a flow of many materials from it, and its cure was accordingly paused until the hip was fistulated, and it made way for many orifices which all poured out putridity and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And thus, many doctors were treating it for about two years, and they did not have knowledge in medicine, only in the art, until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the hip of that man and the materials that were flowing from it through many orifices; and already the body of that man was totally stunted and his color was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And accordingly, I examined all the orifices and found those that reached their respective parts of the hip.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and inserted myself into one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted, and already it was rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and a part of the hip had already been corrupted to the extent that it had penetrated into the pelvis.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I saw what was revealed and prepared for me from the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone, but rather that corruption which had consumed and destroyed, and I had already begun to desecrate.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And accordingly, I iterated and discovered again on the bone subsequently to the initial discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I saw that what appeared to me from that corruption was not sufficient for the cure and restoration of it, and accordingly, I was forced to make the operation and restore it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered again on the other side and did not cease to insert into the small bone little by little, particularly, and forced the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inserted around a palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly, I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for iteration in the operation of it and section of it, except by the disposition of the friar of it and by the paucity of tolerance of it and fear of death, because to it occurs at all hours due to superfluous evacuation syncopal bad.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus, the healing is by total healing, and nothing remains in place of bone hard flesh; and good disposition has been made for it within its own body, and the virtue of it returns; and it is converted into its own dispositions, and does not make contrariety in walking or harm to any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is bone prominent in the body already traumatized, then you must cut that according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it; and pause that ligament of coarse wool more than the first ligament; and accordingly, bind that over the flesh that remains on the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh on the place which you want to cut off so that the cut does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause the knife or table over the bone decently, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to cut off the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the cutting be done over the corrupt area little by little, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and you are forced to cut off another part.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is more likely that one part continues into another, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it; then you will uncover all parts of the flesh entirely; and accordingly, pause your knife, and accordingly, cut off that from the first part where the corruption is until the cutting of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And be the cutting according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, cut into that corrupted joint, and cut off the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but by nature.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the arm or leg, it is quite difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in which manner it appears to you, and cut into that, and cleanse that according to any disposition that is possible for you, and with each case, rectify what is contrary to you, when it does not affect veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what instruments are used and the saws to cut into these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness, subtlety, greatness, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare for all kinds of operations and instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation means to you about the kind of instrument which you need; when with you is great study and long and deep knowledge of the manners of this art, and witness to the mannerisms of diseases, for then you already have them for yourself, what is convenient to all instruments for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I shall present to you the list of instruments which will pause with you as simple ones, with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Forma of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another great saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of Ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	So the head of this saw is like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points are shaped like those of an astelfigi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable to use this saw except when the heads of the joints are confricated (i.e., crushed or broken) and are corrupted, or if there is a large and wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the largest razor among others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of the smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of the large razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw decently made:
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of the razor with concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another curved-edge razor:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a probe:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an instrument used to cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller instrument used to cut:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another instrument resembling a saw:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a saw that is suitable for cutting through bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp edge.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, it seems that all the causes we have discussed regarding razors, instruments, and saws are applicable to this instrument as well.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	And it is used for cutting into extremities and cutting through bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be affected either by an internal cause or an external cause, or as you will medicate that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not conform, sometimes the corruption goes to the member which is not struck by any cause. Then it is necessary for you to cut into that member until the harm caused by the corruption reaches a certain point, so that the sick person escapes from death or malice which is greater than the defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is when the member becomes black until it is cut and burned, or if you can bring the blackness closer so that the burning goes into that member that is like it and takes over the whole body; and thus you must take account of this.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is a cause of corruption due to the sting of certain venomous causes such as the scorpion of the sea or the viper or the ratel and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or sting is in the tip of the finger, then you must cut off the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you must cut off that of the wrist, and not give space to the corruption so that it does not take hold in the armpit of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it reaches the arm, then you must cut off the arm at the shoulder joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes and spreads around the shoulder joint, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this one in cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you must cut off that at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold at the ankle of the foot, then you must cut off the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates into the leg, then you must cut off the thigh at the junction of the leg.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already prevailed over the leg, then in that case there is no remedy, but only dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting off the limb or sawing it is that you strengthen one ligament at the part farthest from where you want to cut, and stretch another ligament over the location; and extend one minister's ligament to the parts behind, and extend the other minister's ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, leaving a gap about as wide as the thickness of a spatula, so that all the flesh is revealed; and then it is cut or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over all the parts so that the location is not touched, and that the wound comes to the patient adjusted and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs during the operation, then you must cauterize the location calmly, or pause for a moment and use some binding powders to staunch the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a ligature to the wounded limb at a convenient point, and cure that until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that you attempt to heal a man whose toe is affected by this accident which we and you have recounted, which is when it becomes black in his foot with an inflammation that was assembled as if by the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption began first in his toe and spread throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for the possibility that pus would come out and the cure would go to the member with the vehemence of his pain and inflammation of it, and he cut off that foot at the junction, and it became healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that corruption had spread to the finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and thus I perceived the surplus of that corruption above which was suspended over his hand with regard to the medicines, so that the purging of his body began; and no longer was the surplus reflected back, but instead it began to move towards another finger in his hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do that, hoping instead for the reflection of that surplus back onto itself, but rather fearing the amputation of his hand, since the patient's vital force was already at a low ebb.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and reported to me that the man had prepared and cut off his entire hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not narrated this story except to serve as an aid for those who seek to understand this disease, and to provide a signification by which it may be interpreted and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	The care of wounds and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some flesh and the space of the abscess is prolonged to form a collection of pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the location remains open like a vessel, with a covering that is like thin cloth, and there is no further corruption, and it does not penetrate into bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption enters into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for this is that you cut out that covering entirely, as it is revolved, and especially when it is thinned out and made like cloth, and make sure that it does not stick to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you think that the covering will stick and that the corruption has not had its due consequence, and in the covering there has been a change of direction, then you cure that with poultice.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And so you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of the kind that gives off an odor, then apply poultice to that with Egyptian medicine which is made from oil, vinegar, and zingiber receiving equal parts, and be adjusted in a vessel, and be poured over the fire until the medicine becomes rough and turns into a substance like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it the water that is necessary and dissolve it with equal parts of water and honey; and apply poultice to that sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the amount of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you extract that abscess; and make it so for as many days as is necessary until the sinus is cleansed and the stench is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is applied with ash water, when this medicine is not present; and it is that you take the ash of vines, and put it on top of water; and then mix it together and apply poultice to that with it until you are convinced that the sinus is closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then apply poultice to that with honey and water mixed with a small amount of zingiber shredded, and then apply poultice to that with vinegar and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleanses, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in vinegar there is an excess of stiptic and drying properties.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are convinced that the sinus is now removed, then apply poultice to that with water that makes the skin appear in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take from the divine dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic vinegar; or that you apply poultice to that with several medicines and other substances that have properties such as those which I have already written in the treatise on medicines.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the canula of the poultice, then you amplify that with a small iron tool bit by bit, and pause in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilic cloth until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you add the lips of it with a suture and leave it in such quantity that the poultice can be added to it.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of that from which the arm flows is elevated to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest part of it so that the arm flows into it, because when the arm is constricted in the swelling of the sinus, the flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environs of the bone, then you should perforate the member with preparation for which the arm will flow slightly according to your apparel and that there be no reason in it for the arm to be retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed on the sinus in a way that you want to extend them onto cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity that it makes communication with all the sinus; and then cut out the folds in the right side of the opening of the sinus, making a channel slightly wider than the opening of the sinus; and then extend over another cloth of linen the leon's enguents according to the quantity of the channel, and pause on that for a long position near the opening of the sinus so that it eases the exit of the arm from there and does not tear off the cloth too quickly.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is on the opening of the sinus, which remains in all its hour because it is adjusted to the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you can know if what comes out from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And at this point you consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is dropped on the opening of the sinus already sticking or approaching adhesion, then dry it out with a cloth or a small tool on the third day, and when you remove the dressing, then change the cloth for another and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there is too little space for a subtle virus to be present, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it is approaching, because some people in whom tardy generation of flesh occurs in their wounds, and others are in those in which the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus it takes many days for an undigested arm to be present, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause prolonged, then you adjust in exsiccation of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they are dried out like enguent dyafinicon, when there is an excessive addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most later of all is that which is cured, that you take from dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it to the wound with an old equal substance, and then confirm that on it, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems so in that action, when there is no brac, dyafinicon, and honey when it is mixed into being thickened, and use it; or that you take myrrh and aloen and onions, and grind everything together and powderize it over the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it up with water on cloth and stretch it over the sinus; and line it up with the honey which has been mixed into being thickened, and powderize it on cloth and stretch it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times it is administered at the aristological long and razed of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and farina of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them together and powderize them over the honey which has been recounted; and husk it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in the preon of it, and already inquiry is made in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with fistular treatment, just as above is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the cure of panarici, and unguis attritae, and incision of finger added, and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that leaves behind the nail of the toe or finger, and spreads quickly to other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it becomes apostematized with caution, or it becomes corrupted, and throws forth brackish water within which corrodes the root of the nail, and quickly corrupts that entirely, and quickly pervades its corruption to the bone, and makes a fetid odor, and causes the extremity of the finger to become gangrenous.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you inscribe with iron all the superfluitat that remains of the nail and appropriate cauterize the wound with water, for cauterization is most helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the adductions of the nail are already compressing the flesh to the parts outside, and begin to prick and lead it away from that place, then you must pause a fine ray below the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it up and inscribe it into the flesh with ease, and pause over what remains of the flesh of the medicines combining corrosive substances until it is all removed; and then cure that with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then you must inscribe the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing that is corrupted in the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if at times the corrosion and corruption go into the digit, then you must inscribe it in one of the joints according to the premonition of its reminiscence, and appropriate cure that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail is inflamed with percussion or attrition, and inflames in that place with a vehement pain, then you must first fleubotomize the malady, and then secate the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful not to allow the section to penetrate into the flesh that is left behind the nail, for you would make the malady cause a vehement pain, and thus cause unnecessary birth of superfluous flesh in that place; and then cure that place with what relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But it is said that this adjustment is natural in many men, and for many is all flesh, or for many is in the bones, or for many is in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or is the birthplace of them in certain joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in certain joints of the finger does not become mad, and that which is born in the junctures is very much maddened.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And from those who are born of flesh, the section is easy, and it is that you must inscribe the root with a sharp spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But from those who are born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the abscess of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born of the digit, thou must first cut off the joints, and then inscribe with a round instrument into the bone, and afterwards saw with one of those saws suitable for this, and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But the consolidation that occurs in the fingers between their joints or due to the nativity of the human being who is born with it, or due to the consolidation of a wound or due to combustion by fire, or for similar reasons, therefore you must cut away that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between their folds with a little oil rose for not being consolidated lightly, and separate those, or pause between those one thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you must cut away that consolidation according to what is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the inscription of vice, there are several.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicas, and so are veins enveloped in thick, full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come forth from the members of the body, and the most common occurrence of theirs is in the hips, and especially in the hips of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body with black cholera several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the Basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of theirs with iron is according to two methods: one is that you inscribe and attract that black blood, and the other method is that you elevate the vein and extract all.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of this is according to this method: first, take the hip with cold water and make it moist until the thick blood is resolved, which is turbid from the hip, and then strengthen the hip of the patient at the highest point of the coccyx, and above that, above the denounment, with a bandage, and then cut off the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide section, and then raise the black blood by the tieua of the partition below the hip, from top to bottom, until the desired quantity of blood is removed, which takes away the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then lie down, and command to him that he abstain from foods that generate black cholera.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And iterate the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of theirs is according to this method: you who raise the hip of the patient, if it is covered with moss (mots pels), and then put it in a bath and wrap the hip with cold water until it becomes red and the veins are filled; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, even without bath, until the member is warm.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord (codena) in the right side of the vein for a section in the long or end part of it, or in the lower part of it, you should make the hole (lo talo).
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then fill the cord (codena) with unguents and scrape off the vein from all parts until it appears to the sensation, and be aware of that which times that part often asks for darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus, as you take away (cum evazeys) the cord (codena), and the white substance that is cord-like (quays sia corda).
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you must put away that which is the way (le ray) so that it may be elevated and thrown away from the cord (codena), and suspend it with a hook (orp) like a lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then you must make another section (seccio) near that section for three fingers (ditz), and then scrape off the cord (codena) from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then you must elevate that and inscribe it in the rear section of the talo (le talo), and then extract it and elevate it until it is emerged through the second section, and then extract it from the section above.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then do this until you extract it from the highest or uppermost section of all the sections, until everything is emerged; and then inscribe it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey your order to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and bind it (ligua aquela) and extract it, or insert below it the way and revolve your hand around the entire area until it is gone.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not torn (inscidida); for if it is broken, it will become difficult for you to elevate that part and it will come back upon the patient as a nuisance.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that has been removed (tota) is fully gone, then pause over the place of the wound, submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted (tortuositat) without a normal curvature, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you must cut across that part of tortuosity of yours and at the places where there is curvature, and then suspend it with unguents until you elevate it all.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that your incision (seccio) does not cut into the vein and does not injure it, for then it would be difficult for you to elevate it; and exercise caution in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision that is made with the blood:
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of a hook-like instrument:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not like that of a hook or scissors, nor has it an acute extremity so as to injure the vein; but rather it has a thick and flexible lion-like shape, because if it were too subtle, it would cut into the vein due to its subtlety; and it has in excess a thickness similar to what we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	The extraction of the saphenous vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the hips (cambas) in cold lands, as Al-Ategi said in the land of Arabs and in dry lands with little moisture and in those where there is no grass nor river.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body beyond the hips.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that remains after the cord (codena) as well as venom poured out from the body of serpents, worms, and scorpions, and worms generated between the cord and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the coming of it is when this vein in the hip becomes inflamed with great fervor; and at that place, vesicles form; and then the vein begins to emerge from that location where it appears as if a plant has taken root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when the extremity appears from him, you must wrap around it a leaden cloth of which one ounce weighs two drams, and anoint it and let the lead hang from the hip.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever you find some cause at the outer parts (partidas), wrap it in lead and bind it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the part is prolonged (mot es prolonguat), you must incise one part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut into that which has a root (de razit) until it is fully gone, for if you cut into it, it will be contracted and enter into the flesh and cause apostema and burning in that place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore, it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it little by little, until it is fully removed from the body and there is no remaining cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have been extracted who are in its length of 20 palms and I have already seen one who was 30 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication (hora de la sua medicacio), then you must introduce the ray into the track of it and pierce that part with a long track through the body, until all that which is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that part by the cure of apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches (motz ramps), and especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes out with many orifices (orrificis), and is issued from each orifice a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore, cure that part just like we have said in the division and also as has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the removal of worms generated under the skin and it is called Bovine Ailment.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands the Bovine Ailment because many times it appears to be related to oxen and there is a worm that is born between the cord (codena) and the flesh, which goes throughout the body rising and falling, and is felt by the sensation of the own affection for limb to limb until it breaks the cord and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of this worm is due to putrefaction (putrefaccio) of certain humors, just like it happens with worms and serpents and lizards and scorpions in the womb.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of this worm, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it is very strong in it and goes into it and destroys it, and that ends many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not proceed if you do not have the patient's consent and appearance of the wound (sentiment), and thus it is necessary to stretch what is above it and what is left of it with gentle constriction, and then bind over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is buried in the flesh and you do not remove it, then you must pause the cauterizing iron with fire on the location until it dies, and the greatest fear that is feared is the corruption of the surrounding area which corrupts the location just as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you find that the worm has reached the head near the brain, then strengthen the scalp with a strong stricture, and then bind over it, and extract it; and it is necessary for the patient to use the purification of their body with medicines evacuating bad humors, and beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the removal of worms from the skin (sectione super aegritudinem nafir).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and is spread from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you already know it, as I have recommended it to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the vein at the end of the arm, and after being there for an hour, I saw that swelling go away just like worms rise up to this place, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it flows from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I went back to the pain in that place and fixed myself into the muscle, and there stayed for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I corrected it in another direction until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I told myself that it was revolving itself around the entire body according to what you saw; and it was too marvelous the transformation of it and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own flesh according to that manner; however, I have seen many others which also suffer from being transformed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in the same way with my own flesh as I saw it in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I didn't think it was this way, but rather it is because the woman was old, with few seconds and veins uncovered, and in this appearance, that ventosity became perceptible.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this condition does not appear according to this retrograde course in those who are delicacies and have humid hearts with veins hardened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure of that, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you what is happening at the top as we have said, but you must strengthen over that and leave it slightly open and dry over that until that ventosity is blocked, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not treat it with the right pulse, then you must cure that with excitement of the chest and with what expels ventosity, and charm those with foul pills and with pills of serape and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the removal of thorns.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Thorns are diversified according to species, and according to the locations of the body where they grow, because their diversity is that some have great points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and those with tongues; and those with stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the passions in which it grows is according to two manners: because the members or are principal members concave, like the brain, the heart, and the spine, and the lungs, and the kidneys, and the bladder, and the womb, and their likenesses; and therefore when it caters in one of these members and appears to you as a sign of death, which cause I will describe to you accurately, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that thorn from those where death would be that member in its greatest disposition, and when it does not appear to you these evil signs, and the thorn is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that one and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant is when it caters in the sageta, and trespasses the bone, and is situated above the cyphac which is on the brain, because accident occurs due to soda vehement, scotomia, vertigo, and roar in the ears, and inflammation and roar of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of gall, and it is very much destroyed the word and is ruined the voice, and there is situated above the wound a humid white substance similar to powder, and there is an appearance of water like the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then it is necessary that you abstain from the cure and extraction of the thorn, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the thorn when it caters in the heart are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if something has been placed there in a hard cause, and not a soft one; and very soon the movement of the thorn is like the movement of the pulse, and flows from the wound black blood, and there is a feeling of coldness in the extremities, and a shivering sensation, and fainting; and therefore know that death is descending upon you completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the thorn has pierced the lung are that blood foam comes from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the patient's complexion changes, and the spirit breathes heavily, and asks for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the thorn pierces the membrane which is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small ribs, and it makes a great loud noise with violent pain and sighing, and none of the members of the muscles can be moved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the thorn pierces the stomach, then very soon there will be some undigested food coming out of the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the thorn pierces the belly and is stuck there, then some gap or tear in the wound, or the membrane or bladder which is broken, and there is no hope for the cure of the extraction of the thorn.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the thorn pierces the bladder and is voided outside as urine, and processes some cause to the parts outside, and very soon there is pain on the patient, then you should know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other members such as the face, neck, and groin, and the shoulders and assistants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the furcula, and the coccyx, and the hip and its likenesses to the members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the thorn does not touch a vein or artery and is not a venomous thorn.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I tell you this, that I have seen the being of these thorns, and for what it signifies for the cure of this illness.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that when the thorn pierces in the lacrimal of the eye socket in the root of the nose, and I extract it from the other side, leaving the gray matter of the ear behind, and he recovers, and does not suffer any harm to the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another thorn from a Jew, which had pierced him in the gray matter of his eye socket, leaving behind the eyelid plus further, and the thorn was already hidden and not visible except for a small extremity with which it adhered to his fist, and it was a great thorn of the sharp thorns of the Turks, like a lion's claw without ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew sat, and did not suffer any harm in his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another thorn from a Christian man, which was lodged in the groin area, and it was an Arab thorn, and it had ears; and then I incised above that one between two guides, and it was already submerged in his groin; and then I carefully extracted it, and he is now healed, the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another thorn from a man, which was lodged in his stomach, and thought that he would die because of it; and therefore, since more than 30 days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised above the thorn and operated on it, and he is now healed, and not affected by the harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom a thorn had pierced the spine of his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and after almost seven years, the thorn came out at the root of the backbone.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom a thorn had pierced her stomach, and the wound was consolidated on the inside of her, and it had not changed in her condition for many years, and the woman did not experience any harm or difficulty with any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom a thorn had pierced his face and the wound was consolidated and the thorn remained, not causing any great pain or resembling those.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the thorn from the king's nose, which was lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side by a small amount, and the whole thorn was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was summoned for the treatment of him within three days after the thorn entered.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the thorn very carefully; and then I inquired about it with subtle attempts, and did not feel any pain; but he felt a pricking sensation behind his right earlobe, and then I suspected that this prick was from the extremity of the thorn.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the ointment to the place where it is virtuous for attracting and digestion, believing that the place is inflamed because of the thorn's presence, and that it needs to be cleansed over that area.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident in the place where the thorn had managed to reach that location; and I continued to apply the ointment on him for many days, and there was no accident; and the wound consolidated in the meantime, and the patient's malady from the exit of his nose remained for several days until one day he felt the thorn inside his nose and recognized it again.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied to the wound acute corrosive medicine for many days until it was fully open, and with the attempt, I carefully extracted that extremity of the thorn which adhered to his fist.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted in the appearance of the wound with that acute medicine until it became visible to me as the extremity of the thorn, and passed on to something else with this space of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then as the wound became amplified, and I had the possibility to enter it with forceps, and remain there, and not obey any orders, but rather, I continued to subtilize and engineer on that spot using the methods of engineering, until one day on that spot using the methods of engineers, taking him with descending forceps, according to the shape of those in the end of the capital, within which I extracted it; and then restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed by whole health, and there is no damage to him in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some thorns because it is necessary that you pause here and consider the rule and significance of what has been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended by narration or free speech.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans know well how to compare a little with much, and on what is present with what is absent; and they find new operation and new instruments that are necessary for the descent of external causes from art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore, I say that thorns are not expelled from the members in which they are stuck, except according to two ways: or by attraction of the place where they entered; or by contrary motion of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled by the place where it entered, or is a thorn proceeding from a fleshly location, and is attracted and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the sign of the hour in which it was caught, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it becomes putrid, and the attraction to it and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not obey your sign, then leave it for some days and iterate the attraction and motion every day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your sign after some days, then you should pierce the circuit of the thorn in that bone on all sides with a subtle tool until the location is amplified by the thorn, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the thorn is stuck in the bone of the skull and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears to be causing some kind of malady or illness due to those accidents which I have described, then refrain from attempting to extract the thorn and leave it alone for a few days until its essence becomes equalized. For if the thorn penetrates too deeply, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the thorn is not stuck but only in the marrow of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and the malady remains for a few days, and there is no cause to fear any of those accidents, then you should endeavor to attract the thorn and its attraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And if it is very stuck and does not obey your attempts at extraction, then you should administer subtle instruments (taravels) in the circuit of the thorn as we have recommended, and properly care for the location until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the thorn is already hidden in the location of the flesh, and is hidden from feeling, then you should inquire into it with gentle attempt, and if you feel it, then attract it with some suitable instruments that are fitting for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot get to it on that side due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the preone, and here there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you should feel over the wound until it is amplified and it becomes possible to extract the thorn.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the means to obtain them at a suitable price, then you should deliver the flesh in which it is stuck on all sides with all the skill that you can muster; and invent something over this, if you cannot obtain the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those until it complies.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the thorn in every location where it is, then you should use with twisting of your hand and forceps on all sides until it complies; and subtlety with subtle delicacy that the thorn is not broken and that it is made to fit your difficult attraction to it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do anything about that of your hour, then you should leave for some days until the parts that are in the circle of it become settled, and then iterate again when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is contrary flow of blood to you, then you should administer the water that we have said in our chapter on cure.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And take care of your virtue of inscizio of vein or nerve or cord, and administer skill in every manner possible to the evasion of the thorn; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, that you may counteract the thorn in such a way that the malady is according to the figure according to which you are forced to cauterize the thorn in it, because it is more justifiable.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then you should administer what is possible to you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the thorns that are expelled by the contrary of the other part, or which already have proceeded some part to the parts outside, or make softness (gillibositat) at the extremity of the thorn due to the sensation of the part above the codena propdana and sometimes elevated; then you should see over it; and be the section according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and properly attract it, because it is made light for a sign.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you should twist the thread (lama) according to contrary motion until the thorn (sageta) presses into the bone, and amplify as far as possible, and properly extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, then leave that for some days, and properly iterate that until it is consumed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the root of the thorn is in that place, then you should push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the root is cut and you must administer impulse, then you should introduce it into that place, even if it is deaf, using a hidden instrument so that it enters the concavity of it in the tail of the thorn and properly push it into place.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the thorn is concave, then you should push it into place with a strong instrument entering into that, because the thorn is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	But if the thorn is embedded, then you should cover all the flesh where it is located, if that is possible to you, and properly care for it with what is necessary.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the thorn (sageta) is stuck in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to see over it, then look over it and take care not to damage any veins or nerves, and extract it, and properly cover the wound if necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Forma of forceps by which are attracted thorns:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The extremities (ends) of which are like the beak of an owl, and are made as if they were a saw when they take hold on the thorn so that it does not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are many species, great, few, and mid-sized, according to the quantity of greatness of the thorn and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the hidden impulse of this extremity is like the beak of an owl, so that it may be alleviated the instrument of the thorn in it, and the silent push:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of the silent impulse:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	As if a ray of light that is alleviated the instrument of it in the concave thorn and is pushed into it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy on the veins:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, which are accustomed to being cut by phlebotomy... of which there are 16 on the head... which are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, as they say; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals of the two eyes which are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are to the throat; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and – these are the veins that are called algelic –; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But there are 5 veins that are cut in the arms... because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it is located in the wild arm; and the people call it "the vein of the head", silent, and it is a mid-sized vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that the people "the vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein that is located in the domestic arm, and it is called "citillar", and common people call it "vein of the belly"; and the arm veins, and it is located on the forearm, and it is the one where phlebotomy is done, and it is the one that appears on the shoulder for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two branches in it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of which is that which is located below the curvature of the tibia of the wild arm; and the second is saphena, and its location is below the thigh of the domestic arm; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild arm; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The flow of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhs, antiques and migraines, saharitis and ulcerous sores on the head, old evils.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you recommend to yourself: that it should be clean the head of the patient, and that the head of the patient should be massaged on the occiput in the location where both veins meet with a wide cloth and good friction; bring the patient's neck tight with a bandage until the two veins appear at their locations near the ears in two spots under the cap; and then ask yourself if you feel the pulse of those with your own said, and if you do not sense it with your own said, here I will not try.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the lancet-cutting instrument, and it is that which is inserted, and take it into that location below the vein in the cord until the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand and take hold of the vein and cord at the parted parts above and cut into the vein with a cutting instrument.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And make the length of the incision two digits or around that, and let blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then take out the blood and leave it to be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And now and previously in the beginning of this book, I have described the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arteries that are on the temples, the flow of bloodletting is for ancient and bad migraines, frequent obtalmia, and a body with acute effusions in the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what you recommend to yourself: constrain the patient's neck tightly until the two veins appear by sensation and are demonstrated manifestly, and let your pulse be felt below the said tie; and then try again if it doesn't work.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the cord above the vein at the parted parts above, indicated by your pulse, and insert the bloodletting instrument below, and lift the vein up; and cut into it just like you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause your pulse on the vein for an hour, and then pause on that spot and pulp and strengthen that part above with strong constriction, and leave it to be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now it is preceded by the remembrance of theirs, and of those, and their incision, and attraction in the beginning of this book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the flow of bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is suitable for the bloodletting of the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face and ancient migraines, and rages, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bloodletting there is according to what you recommend to yourself; so it is that the patient tightens their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point that is at the tip of the fossor above that vein and strike on it with a gentle or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with bloodletting late, but it does not need that the bloodletting be of acute extremity just like the other bloodlettings, but rather ahead of the lateral extremity, and bloodlet there according to the traverse, because the bone is propitious and strong enough to break through the bloodletting when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the flow of the two veins that are on the lacrimals of two eyes for the scabs of the eyes due to rage and sebum in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient tightens their neck with a bandage, and then you stand on top of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And so the bloodletting is done according to the traverse at a length of a little bit with some bloodletting, because in that location there is no flesh; and if the bloodletting is subtle, then the extremity of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as you need it to, and pause on those spots, and strengthen them for one night, and then release them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the bloodletting of the nasal vein is related to acute fever and strong thirst, and to diseases of the face and ancient migraines and rages that occur on the face, and most especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting there is that the patient tightens their neck and you take your right hand and hold it to the patient's nose with your left hand, and take the bloodletting instrument subtle and long and place it in the middle location of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear by sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is necessary that you finish your hand with the bloodletting instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then tie it up for one night, because it is restored gradually.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the flow of bloodletting from the two guides leads to constriction of the eyes and the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases and impurities and bad ulcers that are corroded like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is that the patient tightens each one in their neck with a bandage; and the artist sits on top of the patient's head, and the patient is seated on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then let blood flow from the vein at length with an ample and small bloodletting, little by little; and then extract blood according to the quantity of time or according to what is needed, as it is required; and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the bandage and strengthen the two veins with a gentle pressure to ensure that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the flow of bloodletting from the Algerian veins, causes small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and to bad ulcers that are on the nose and in the surrounding area.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is that it makes the patient sit before you, and tighten their neck with a bandage, and then turn up the lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this more so because in the circuit of those small black veins; and therefore incise each for incision incident.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if there is doubt left in you, and you do not know which one is the greatest of these, then you must understand to incise the most prominent one of those, and the most evident one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more common to cut into the two veins that are on the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But the flow from the two veins below the tongue is suitable for bloodletting of the cephalic vein in cases of obstruction that are in the goiter, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting from those is that it follows the patient between your arms in front of the sun, and raises the tongue of him, and looks down at the tongue, from one side of the vein to the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one (fleubotoma quascuna); and be careful that you don't finish your hand in bleeding those veins, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are bloodletted in the cold are those in which bleeding is customary for all men, and the bloodletting of theirs is done according to two methods, either by placing the bloodletting instrument on the vein with a subtle inclination or on an olive branch; or cutting it off with a cutlery instrument and calling it "silence", and this is the form that is used:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this silence is that which corresponds to the section and of those species, fine and subtle, according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the constriction of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Forma de fleubotomi mirti:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	So be it that the width of him is as much as times, and it corresponds to open the concave veins full of blood proceeding from apparent great thickness, and to those that contain thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive branch bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser latitude and more subtle extremity, and it corresponds to bloodletting of fine veins that contain subtle citrine blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the flow of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, for extracting the blood of diseases that are below the goiter and throat, and from this it clears the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is fitting for the bloodletting practitioner, when bloodletting that, to be careful with that and to have a preoccupation with that, because beneath him there is an artery, and if he erred and adjusted in the puncture of the bloodletting, he would incise that artery and cause bleeding, which is why it is necessary not to bloodlet that with the sharp instrument, but rather to cut with silence.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear in a manifest manner, then you must leave it and move to another or seek out some branch of it; or bloodlet at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and cut it with the bloodletting instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want to do the bloodletting of him, then it is necessary before the constriction of the arm that touches the location inside where you know the location of the hands, and place a sign on him with a notch; and tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave sectioning instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the percussion for some space from the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you tie, with the ligature, inflation in the location that you have marked with a notch, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows in the bloodletting as if it were the milk of a child, and the blood is very subtle and red, then you know that it is from the artery; and when you see and pause your statement about that for a long time; and appropriately open your statement, and if the blood has been cut off, because many veins are cut off, then you tighten the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And beware of the patient's excrement and be over-concerned with him and do not worry about it for a few days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not cut off and you are not present with medicine to that, then you must incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of him is contracted, and the blood is cut off; or take a scissor-like device made from fists, and open it up, and take one half and tighten it on the location of the vein with constriction and ligament and powder inside another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is cut off, it is good; and otherwise, then cure that with what preceded it to the memory of the location where the powder-filled vessels have been cut off.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting off of the blood from him is difficult in many situations due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But from the jugular vein (de la vena fusca) bloodletting is a flow that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; therefore, because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the bloodletting practitioner to be over-concerned with that which lies beneath the skin, for beneath it there is a nerve; and accordingly, if he adjusts in the puncture of the bloodletting and finds the nerve, he will cause stupor in him, and it is difficult for him to recover, and even if he is not entirely healed, And this nerve often appears with sensation; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and does not show itself, then it is necessary for you to pause the bloodletting with the instrument of sharpness, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The flow of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood of the head and comforts the diseases of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is necessary in this way, if you want to make the bloodletting pierce with olive branch bloodletting or myrtle bloodletting; because it is the most saved of all veins, since there is no artery nor nerve below.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But I must advise you to take care that in the bloodletting you do not puncture the top of the lacert only and search for the location which is nearest, and not note it unless it is found by the first percussion which is above that location a few times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But I must advise you that often times the patient is inflamed in some men when it is not bloodletted in the first percussion, but not noted in such a way.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the bloodletting and its accidents are many, in which you must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first one is of the kind that you should know that bloodletting is not administered except in the conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution against the event of diseases; and that the bloodletting is done on one of the three veins that are in the arm, namely cephalic, jugular, and basilic; and that the bloodletting is done at the beginning of spring, after a light meal, in the morning, and in autumn, before a heavy meal, and in winter, just before eating, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And the bloodletting should be done three days or at the first opportunity after the sun has passed three hours.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But bloodletting that is administered is done when it is convenient and necessary for the patient, whether it be in the morning or afternoon, at any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that children under 14 years old should not be bloodletted, and women should not be bloodletted unless they are past the fourth month of pregnancy up to seven months, and elderly people should not be bloodletted if they have passed 60 years old.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And whoever wants to be bloodletted by some means or other, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before the bloodletting with a leon's clister, if in those there is a notable fleshy fold, so that the veins do not fill up with superfluous substances during the bloodletting of the bowels, which are pure and do not harm the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And one should not be bloodletted while having nausea and vomiting, or if one has a bad habit of drinking too much wine, nor after getting drunk, unless the above-mentioned symptoms have been purged from their body. Nor should one be bloodletted when suffering from dropsy or other water-based illnesses. Instead, one should wait until the following symptoms have passed: colic pain, vomiting, and stomach upset, as well as multiple bowel movements, labor pains, and excessive exercise, all of which dissolve the virtues of the body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And carefully consider in subtle inquiry of vapors before this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for that.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And enter into bath if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise for some exercise so that the blood may be subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the bloodletting at that point in the day, around the hour of tercia, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And force yourself to keep the point of that day free from all animal evils, as is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, just like excessive labor and unnecessary pain, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And make sure that your chamber is filled with the causes of which the custom of men uses aromatics and odors, and balms, and things similar to these, according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the bloodletting practitioner on a couch that is higher than the one that should be used for bloodletting.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And gently take out the patient's arm, and wipe it with their own hand or the bloodletting practitioner's two or three times; and then tighten the ligature around the cord and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the constriction should be moderate, because if the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is with superfluous substance, hours prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with mollification, and hours prohibit the body's blood from flowing.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And carefully observe the constriction, for it is necessary that the one who should be bloodletted wipe his own hands between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the sense.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the bloodletting practitioner put a little bit of old oil on their own finger; and pause their right hand index finger over that vein, leaving the place where you want the bloodletting to take place, so that the vein will flow a little, and the pulsation will be settled when you find the one that is like a cord fleeing from the bloodletting, and those are the ones that are full of windiness; and when you pause the bloodletting on that one, it will be contracted and then released, and the bloodletting practitioner will become confused; and the bloodletting will not fill the vein, and if it does, that one is blocked.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the bloodletting practitioner be fixed and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And thus, pause the bloodletting, but if the vein is swollen in one place, it is better to; and if not, try another place a little way from that location, or over the festive area, if the location is not exhausted.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is exhausted or the patient becomes feverish, it is better to leave them alone for a day or two and not tighten the ligature, because too much tension will attract another apostema, nor should they enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And thus, repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the bleeding is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not yield the amount of blood you want, then you should repeat the bloodletting in that same spot according to rectitude and adjust the pressure a little, and do so with a festive atmosphere before the location becomes exhausted, because the location becomes exhausted in many men due to too little bleeding.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if sometimes that place is exhausted, then do not repeat the bloodletting there, because it does not excuse any cause; and pause on another part of the vein of oil, because it soothes the body's blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place that oil and the other oils are used.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer the vein of oil in all bloodletting procedures where one is prohibited from cutting into the body's natural flow of blood, and do so with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on one of those locations, because the blood is subtle and revolts when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the location of bloodletting a great apostema is generated, because many times it happens, and especially to him who has not been bled since that vein, or when there is little bleeding in the vein, then you should cover it, and pause on that location, and soak it in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten that for an hour, until it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do so in accordance with the natural flow of blood from that vein, either by itself or in conjunction with another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the same location for some days with a certain darkness or greenish tint, do not notice this; and if you wish, pause on that location with a mixture of aloen and dissolved mirra, or with a mixture of mint juice, calament, or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times accidents occur, such as apostemas and eminences, due to bloodletting from the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so pause your hand over that place, and if you find moisture there, then apply compression to that place with your compressive force, and since that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore, be careful not to pause on that place with any of the causes we have discussed, for it may flow forth from the artery with great force.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to that place in which it is stiptic, so that the location may be hardened, and take care of it with another treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract the blood from every person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that appears on top of the blood, as seen by the appearance.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see that it is thick, then you should let it flow until it becomes thinner; and similarly, if it is sharp, then let it flow until the sharpness is gone.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong and has need of bloodletting in a single instance, that the bloodletting procedure be amplified in the vein and the bleeding be slow.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for the one who is frail, do the opposite of what I have said, and it is necessary to extract that blood in frequent intervals, and make sure the cut is narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best way to administer bloodletting from a vein is through a transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and it is more commendable and more safe than bloodletting according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And if there is a habit of syncope preceding, it is necessary to perform bloodletting, and you should care for that person beforehand by infusing them with a small amount of wine mixed with milgranas or oxymel, lightly scalded; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a tendency towards inflammation of the completion, then take care beforehand to infuse into the blood vessel with a mixture of myrrh or aromatic oil made from mel, flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar substances, or with an aromatic oil that has a strong odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncopal episodes occur, it is necessary to perform bloodletting, and it is the cause of a great deal of blood loss, then take care beforehand by drinking water from the flesh of cattle and aromatic oil with a strong and subtle scent; and use aromaticity with some caution, and make sure that the patient's feet are in contact with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to open their arm and dissolve their blood according to the second stage, should consider that for which bloodletting is done in order to evacuate, and the virtue of which is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, as it is according to the quantity of the virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But whoever wants to open their arm and release their blood according to the first stage, and their body is strong, then do it about 7 hours or 9 after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to attract the blood from their body to the opposite side of the descent where it declines, should be done on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is a great deal of blood already scalded and sharp, and it makes the fever rise, needs to be let out with one stroke and a large quantity of blood should be taken away, and the attention should be amplified until syncope occurs; more so if you have kept all the conditions of bloodletting, and you should pause your hand over the pulse of the body from which the blood is being taken, in order to prevent death instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the bloodletting operator is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it's not right when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood according to the second stage, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it's difficult to extract the blood, that you press strongly on it and bend it slightly outward, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	They let it go until it is bloodletting secondarily; or they stop there with the acidity of the bloodletting that is coagulated in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that with tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that with a light compression until the blood is outside.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and don't touch it until the inflammation is calmed down.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity requires you to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then you should mark that spot or on another arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is bloodletting in the place of the fusca or basilica when not obstructed or hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the pulse becomes inflamed and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And it should be strong on that spot where the vein is narrow and has a slight constriction; and it should be bloodletting according to the transverse small, not laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be attention wide and your bloodletting with which you bloodlet that spot on the junction of the hand, a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and instead the body's blood is paused in cold water in winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the bloodletting from this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has no pulsating vein nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the bloodletting from the sap vein of the right hand is related to liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of bloodletting from there is that you strengthen your hand with or without a bandage, more than you have put it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and clearly demonstrated at the moment; and then apply bloodletting transversally; and if incisions are made on all sides, do not neglect this in any way.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to leave your hand exposed after bloodletting, because then the nerves of the fingers would be stripped of skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse the hand in cold water, the blood will clot at the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you should pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated too quickly; similarly, you should do in all ways straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the recommendation of bloodletting from that vein on the left hand is that it is related to liver diseases.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in bloodletting from there just as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the recommendation of the vena sephena bloodletting is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, just as it is for diseases of the thigh, and for retention of menses, and for diseases of the throat and ulcerous sores of old knees and hips, and for their likenesses to those diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient inserts their foot into cold water and makes a pressure on it until the veins appear; and then applies pressure over the junction of the foot and the ankle bone; and the location of the vein appears to be deviated from the usual path, and from there it ramifies in the face of the foot with many branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore bloodletting should be done on the most prominent branch below the hip bone, since it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you are bloodletting in the face of the foot, then you should beware of the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot, and pause your bloodletting with which you are bleeding through the transverse incision, as if you were going to cut into it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And thus the bloodletting is useless.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if it is prohibited to let the blood flow; then you should insert the foot of that into cold water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the bloodletting practitioner is wrong in the first attempt, then you should repeat the bloodletting procedure a little, because the location is too difficult; and do not fear for evil, but beware of the nerves just as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, make the same incision on the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location is just as we have said, namely below the hip bone at the level of the gluteal fold.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the recommendation of bloodletting from there is for the hip when it is necessary to stop bleeding.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient should enter into a bath, and hasten and strengthen the skin of the limb from the lateral side to the medial side above the ankle bone, and then make a thin bandage around it, so that nothing appears except through that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, then you should bloodlet that vein according to each individual's ability and according to the transverse direction, and it is better; or make an incision on that side or separate that part by sectioning it, since the location is difficult.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in a few men who are moderately affected; and if you find that one, and there is no appearance of the feeling of all, then bloodlet on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the two sides of the foot below the auricular and anular bones.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let the blood run as much as you like.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And approach closely the stricture and pause over the location of the bloodletting, cutting and strengthening the location, so that it becomes slightly healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozas are from corns, or from ears, or from veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is through scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation without scarification is done according to two methods, because it can be with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventozas that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are 14 locations on the body, among which one place where ventozas are paused is the alnocrati, which is the rear part of the head; and the middle location between the two parts of the neck; and ventozas below the mandible plus below the mouth; and ventozas with two spatulas; and ventozas with alohoster, which is above the end of the coccyx; and ventozas with two fociels, which are on two brasses; and ventozas with two cavilhas; and ventozas with two cuoyssas.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract the blood, but rather releases it from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not cure the disease through those means, just as is done by bloodletting; nor does it matter whether ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion, until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity demands it, provoke ventilation for illness or continued administration, administer that in the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in some men the blood is multiplied within them to such an extent that they become desperate for extraction through ventilation and find themselves with great heaviness and sickness in their head; and those who find repletion and rigor in their face and head, and in their neck; and those who find pruritus in their face and forehead, and tenebrosity and obtuseness in their eyes; and those who lose the place of their ventilation; and those whose laughter is multiplied; and those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue becomes apostemated and spits up blood; and those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in their dreams, with great pain and ancient and other causes to their likeness.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when it happens in some of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation to be performed more than two or three hours after sunrise.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the recommendation for ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity in the head and goes down to the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventozas is in the location of bloodletting of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not allowed that one uses this method on someone who has a complexion of phlegm or in whom is catarrh, for it gives them great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore, one should not use this method on the elderly, and in those whose heads are afflicted with cold diseases.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to those who are continuing on that [path] is made forgetfulness; and therefore it is necessary that you command the ventozador to pause his hand a little before the ventosa at the partitions, in order to fear the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But the ventozacio of alkohel is in the location of bloodletting of the vena fusca and basilica: and therefore confers on asthma, constriction of the lungs, rupture of the lung's membrane, and to the coughing, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the alkohel ventozas be a little filled, because if it is paused too long, it will generate weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventozacio of alhagdahan confers on accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, emigration, preoccupation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is located in the location of bloodletting of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary that you command the bloodletter to not press his hand with scarification so that he does not cut the artery and cause flows of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventozacio on the mento confers on alcola in the mouth, and corruption of the gingiva, and likenesses to their own diseases that are in the mouth; and it is located in the location of bloodletting of aliheric that is on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventozacio that is done on the two spatulas confers on caphatan, which is made by repletion of warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventozacio of the two parts behind the foci confers on justly the bloodletting of three veins, that is, the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because that draws out the blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins that are attached to the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bloodletter not to proceed too quickly with scarification, because the location is stripped of flesh and leaves him only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventozas on which it is ventozated over alshosses and confers on the hemorrhoids of the anus and on ulcers that are later.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary that you command the bloodletter to make a great ventozas, and one of earth, because the location requires strong section; and let there be gentle and subtle ventozas, and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But the ventozas of the cambas are manifested through minuicio, because they attract the blood from all over the body, and confer on old pains in the kidneys and bladder, and provoke menstruation, and confer on bothor and ademil; and they stand in the location of bloodletting of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they are so debilitating that they make accidents of syncope occur in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the ventozas alahorcoben have a justness that is proportional to the justness of the ventozas of two cambas.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventozas is that it pauses the ventoza at the beginning, and sucks up by early succussion, and does not prolong the position of the ventozas, but pauses those slightly, and remains those quietly, and let the humors come to the place by natural arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease until you see the location already redden and swell, and the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And after that, scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that person who has tender flesh and few pores, you should only scarify it once and not again, so that the location is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bloodletter to amplify the scarification and proceed a little, and then apply the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thickened, then afterwards you should scarify twice, because in the first scarification, the way of subtlety to the blood and to its satiation is opened up.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second [scarification], you should proceed with the acquired scrutiny and extraction of the thickened blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be done so that the final result is achieved.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small quantities, it is enough for us with one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then afterwards you should scarify again.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification is the depth of the incision, not just.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the scar is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites of the ventosas be anointed with lenitive, apertive, and resolutive ointments; if it is in the summer, thus it should be done as with olive oil or violet oil or almond oil or sesame oil; and if it is in the winter, afterwards you should use winter ointments such as narcissus oil or lily oil or chamomile oil or blood oil and those similar to them.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is great, then afterwards you should use oil that is amaranthine, or oil of balsamita, or olive oil, or anise oil and those similar to them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the bloodletter is of large pores and tender flesh, then afterwards it is necessary to prohibit oil, and it is necessary that those sites of ventozas where the ventozacio is closest be washed with cold water or icy water from a saltpeter or with water of coja, or with water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose blood is of great humidity, washes his ventozas with vinegar or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that one whose superfluities are great, washes his ventozas with antiseptic vinegar or with water of sansuc (which is majorana), or with the decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the ventozation be done before dawn; having to administer it about an hour or two before dawn, and it is necessary that he sleep near the ventozation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that should be regulated so that the windpipe may be opened and the blood let out before the bleeding?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And thus consider at the beginning: afterwards, if the bloodletter or one who is to be fleubotomized is choleric and vents upon him with sharp blood and inflammation, then it is necessary that he take cooling causes, such as milgranas acetosas, endivia in vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, and similar to those.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause from their foods as well as pulse, and meat of hens serving, and foods cooked with herbs, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that one whose complexion is fresh, it is necessary that he take in drink essence of almiva or essence of alsecanabin of sesame seeds, and sumac, and very fragrant myrrh between veal and Christmas; and that it be commended to him that he uses moderation in drinking and eating, and pause the foods of his pulse and canabir and pigeons and small hens and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of ventozation and fleubotomia, drink be more abundant than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that it be given in drink to certain people at some hours tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musc, as it is muscadada, or alcelita before ventozation or before fleubotomia or nearby, so that the main members may be comforted and the blood be subtilized; and it is not necessary that they take those scaldings.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the ventozas that are to be done by scarification should be ventozas that are paused on the liver, and over the gallbladder and podagra, and over the navel, in the places of the joints, and at the tip of the large intestine, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those [places] but attraction of blood from the member, just as pause a ventosa on the nipple in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that to dissolve ventosity fresh viscous from the member, just as pause over the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and scalds it and relieves the pain which resolves ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused over the tonsils when they are obstructed or swollen, because by virtue of attraction it forcefully opens up obstruction and eradicates swelling from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it is done when it is paused over the liver and gallbladder to dissolve ventosity in those who are enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventozas are administered with suction alone, and sometimes with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in illnesses of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the ventoza should be filled and be made greater, either with hot water or with water in which certain herbs are steeped to suitable proportions.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of ventoza administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two digits, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be half a palm; and it should be in the left side, at the location where it is in the circuit, half of that, the hole being small according to the amount that enters through an agulha.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of earthenware or citrine, with large margins, lion, equal, and terse, in order that it may not lead the member to deviate from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And it should have in the middle a cross-shaped handle of earthenware or iron, where a candle is placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventoza is much larger than the one we have described before; and the small size of that one, according to the diseases and condition of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventosas of the old and exhausted are different from those of the young and strong.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this ventoza with fire on the member is that it extends the ember with good fuel decently before a small candle made of wax, and places it on the middle of the cross-shaped handle in the middle location of the ventoza, so that the fire is lit around the part left over, so that the patient's body is not burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the said should be on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have the ventozas and do not need to use the said and let the vapor rise over that hole, then the ventoza will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And properly ignite the ember according to its manner, and iterate that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in ventosa that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, where there is no cross-shaped handle nor hole, and it is not administered except to be filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And the larger this ventoza is, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	It seems like we've reached the end of the text!
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered on soft members, but rather on members where it is not possible to apply ventosas, due to their small size, such as the tongue and gums, which resemble them; or on a denuded bone, like the tip of the nose and similar ones.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found sanguisugas that are in the waters of pure burning mud.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it should be left for the day and night in water until they are famished, and no cause remains in their belly; and it should be evacuated from the body through fleubotomia and ventozas; and it should be fumigated with a member of the patient until it becomes red; and it should be placed on top.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and broken.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the place with a ventoza, it is more expedient in judgment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and appropriate water, and it should be fumigated and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood flows out of the body and onto the site where the sanguisugas are located, and it is there that they begin to sweat, then you should dip a cloth in cold water and place it on top until the sweating subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol powder or guallas and similar substances that are stiptic causes on it until the blood is absorbed; or apply the ashes of excocicated beans to the location and let them adhere to it until the blood is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And when it is necessary, iterate on the sanguisugas, whenever possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the sanguisugas are prohibited from suspension, then wash the location with recent blood or insert an awl into the places until it bleeds; and then apply, because those that feel any blood soon become attached.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when they start to clot, sprinkle a little bit of crushed aloen, or salt, or ashes on them, and cauterize immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	So begins the process of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is restoration of fractures and dislocations that have occurred by chance in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son of mine, be wise and know that foolish doctors and the common folk, as well as those who have not read the books of the Ancients or have not even glanced at them for a moment, take pride in this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And because of this reason, the manner of the scientists in our land is privatized; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have not added anything that comes after, but only through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those things, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have directed my attention to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described everything that my science contains and on which the best experiment has passed; therefore, I have shortened this for you others and freed it from the occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it in the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and formed it into many forms of instruments that are administered there, just as it was done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	The first chapter!
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A new chapter begins!
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	It seems that the author is now introducing the main ideas of this chapter, as well as the framework for understanding the concepts that will be discussed. The title "Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol" suggests that the author is providing an overview or summary of the chapter's content.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	It seems that the author is now providing guidance on how to approach a situation where a fracture or dislocation has occurred. The phrase "E donc dic que quan accideys" suggests that this is a warning or advice being given.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	It seems that the author is now providing guidance on what kind of food and nutrition to provide for someone who has suffered a fracture or dislocation.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	The author is now providing guidance on how to help the patient return to their normal routine and regimen.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	It seems that the author is now providing guidance on what kind of food and nutrition to provide for someone who has suffered a fracture.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The author is now discussing the issue of osteoporosis and its relationship to age.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	The author is continuing to discuss the issue of osteoporosis and its relationship to age.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The author is now discussing the idea that nature has a way of compensating for and adapting to broken bones.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	The author is now emphasizing the importance of providing the patient with food that is rich in nutrients and has a high viscosity, in order to facilitate healing and recovery.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The author is now discussing the different types of fractures that can occur depending on the location and nature of the affected limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The author is now emphasizing that the types of fractures can be diverse depending on the location and nature of the affected limb.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	The author is now concluding the discussion on fractures and emphasizing the importance of remembering all types of fractures.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The author is now highlighting the diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The author is now highlighting the diversity of fractures within an individual's bones.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The author is now concluding the discussion on fractures and emphasizing the importance of remembering each type of fracture in its own unique context.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	The author is now providing a summary or key point about fractures.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The author is now describing the signs or indications of a bone fracture.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	The author is now describing a situation where there is no obvious twisting or bending of the affected limb, and even when pressure is applied, the patient does not experience significant pain. The author concludes that in this case, there is no fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	The author is now suggesting that even if there is no obvious fracture, it is still possible that there may be some degree of twisting or bending (tortuositat) or a small crack (petita fissura). The author advises against applying excessive pressure or compression to the affected area, and instead suggests pausing to consider the relevant medications and their potential effects on the situation.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The author is now emphasizing the importance of recognizing and addressing any underlying issues that may be contributing to the fracture or injury.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	The author is now providing guidance on how to treat an abscess that has developed in response to the fracture or injury.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The author is now emphasizing that restoring and dressing (agulacio) a wound on the soft tissue (lu) is generally easier than doing so on bone (os).
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	The author is now concluding by emphasizing the importance of remembering the key points discussed earlier.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	The author is now discussing the need for surgical intervention in cases where a bone is fractured and has split into two parts.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	The author is now discussing the importance of returning the fractured bone to its natural position and maintaining it there until the bone has fully healed.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	The author is now emphasizing the importance of being cautious and careful in one's actions, especially when performing an operation or treatment on a patient.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	The author is now emphasizing the importance of taking advantage of opportunities and making adjustments as needed.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	The author is now describing a situation where the excessive stretching and compressing of a limb can lead to the development of an abscess or contracture, similar to what has been observed in the past through the operations performed by foolish doctors.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The author is now describing the importance of proper positioning and alignment of the limb, as well as rest and relaxation, to prevent pain and discomfort. The passage also emphasizes the need for careful observation and management of the patient's condition.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The author is now describing the quality of the bone structure that they are recommending, and emphasizing that each limb has its own unique characteristics in terms of size, shape, and form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The author is now describing the wrapping or bandaging process for small limbs such as arms, hands, and fingers.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The author is now describing the wrapping or bandaging process for larger limbs such as the torso and legs.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	The author is now describing the process of starting to wrap or bandage a limb that has been fractured, and emphasizing the importance of pausing to adjust the wrapping as needed.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	The author is now describing the process of wrapping or bandaging a fractured limb, with an emphasis on ensuring that the wrapping does not put pressure on the fracture site.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	The author is now describing the process of gradually stretching and relaxing the wrapping or bandaging around the fracture site.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	The author is now describing the process of applying a second layer of wrapping or bandaging over the initial wrapping, and emphasizing the importance of ensuring that the wrapping is even and smooth.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The author is now describing the process of applying a pause or break between layers of wrapping or bandaging to prevent any pressure or tension on the fracture site.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	The author is now describing the process of applying a pause or break between layers of wrapping or bandaging, and emphasizing the importance of allowing the area to rest and recover before proceeding.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The author is now describing the shape and size of the stars (stelhas) that are to be used in the wrapping or bandaging process.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	The author is now providing additional instructions for wrapping or bandaging a fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The author is now providing instructions for the threads (fils) used in the wrapping or bandaging process.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	The author is now discussing the importance of using threads that are not too thin or too thick.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The author is now discussing the importance of avoiding pressure or irritation on the patient's skin around the fracture site.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	The author is now discussing the possibility of a fracture occurring in a specific area of the body (plaqua), and how it can lead to disruptions in the body's natural healing process (codena).
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	The author is now cautioning that it's not necessary to immediately wrap every broken limb with stars (stelhas) on the first day. The phrase "la qual causa es" means "which is due to", and the author attributes this to the fact that when a limb is large, it doesn't require wrapping with stars until after 4-7 days or more, depending on the patient's risk of developing an abscess (apostema caut).
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	The author is now concluding that this is the method used by the Ancients to treat fractures and other injuries, specifically wrapping them with a type of plaster (emplaustres) that was applied over the fracture site.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The author is now describing the method of applying emplaustra (a type of plaster) for treating fractures, specifically for women and children, as it is well-suited for this purpose. The text also provides instructions on how to prepare the emplaustra.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	The author is now providing additional instructions on how to prepare the emplaustra.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for an ointment to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is the root of salvaged melon seed, one ounce of each; of myrrh and aloes one ounce five; of alochil twenty ounces; all are crushed and sifted and mixed with water or album of honey if the patient's complexion is scaly; and it is appropriate to use this ointment, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones slightly, and cures many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for an ointment that cures fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh and white altorone one ounce ten; of myrrh and aloe one ounce five; of acacia six ounces; of Armenian balm twenty ounces.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The final sentence!
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Another method for making an emplaustra!
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The limitations of this emplaustra!
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for making an emplaustra!
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortened method for making an emplaustra! The final instructions!
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	The exception!
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for making a stronger emplaustra!
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The wisdom of Hippocrates!
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	The wisdom of Gualia!
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A recipe for an emplaustra to treat lesions and pain!
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The importance of proper application!
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	The warning signs!
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	The treatment protocol!
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	The gentle approach!
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	The final touches!
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	The waiting game! The importance of patience!
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The art of adjusting the constriction!
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	The importance of proper nutrition!
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	The mistake of the unwise restorers!
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	The wisdom of experience!
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	The next chapter!
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The various types of fractures!
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The extent of the injury!
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	The depth of the fracture!
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	The tiny fracture!
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	The fracture that's caused by impact or percussion!
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The prevalence of this type of fracture!
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	The classification of fractures!
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The recall of previous knowledge!
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	The detection and investigation of fractures!
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The detection of the capillary fracture!
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	The importance of considering the patient's symptoms in treating fractures!
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	The importance of addressing non-related symptoms!
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The importance of studying the bone's anatomy!
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	The importance of considering the season!
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	The importance of identifying and treating comminuted fractures!
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	The importance of careful examination and diagnosis!
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	The importance of careful examination and treatment!
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	The possibility of multiple surgical approaches!
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The description of two different surgical approaches!
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	The importance of using the right instrument!
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	The variety of instruments and their uses!
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	The importance of using the right instrument for percussion!
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	The importance of preparing the bone for drilling!
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The importance of using the right drill bit!
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	The importance of having a variety of drill bits!
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	The description of three types of drill bits!
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	The importance of using the right instruments!
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	The importance of caution!
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	The importance of extracting and shaping the bone!
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	The importance of managing small, separated bone fragments!
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The description of another surgical approach!
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The description of the shape and alignment of the bone!
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	The importance of careful and controlled movement!
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	The importance of carefully removing any attached tissue or bone fragments!
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	The importance of smoothing out the bone surface!
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	The importance of carefully shaping the bone!
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	The importance of careful correction!
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	The reason why it is not necessary for all those who have studied this art to be proficient.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The conclusion that we have reached through our writing!
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	The importance of dressing and bandaging the wound!
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	The importance of administering medicine to promote healing!
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	The importance of applying medicine to the wound!
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	The importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection!
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	The importance of considering the consequences of neglecting to treat a wound properly!
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	The use of medicine to treat a wound! The application of a poultice to the wound!
Capitol .iii.	The third chapter!
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	The restoration of the nose when it is broken!
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	The anatomy of the nose!
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	The treatment of a nasal fracture!
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	The importance of caution and care when performing surgery!
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	The treatment of a nasal fracture in the upper part of the nose!
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	The treatment of a nasal fracture that involves two parts!
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	The importance of early intervention and rest!
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	The use of a nasal splint!
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	The use of a nasal splint!
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	The importance of proper nasal splinting!
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	The flexibility of the treatment!
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	The use of a nasal poultice!
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	The use of a nasal poultice without infection!
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	The treatment of nasal bone fractures!
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	The treatment of nasal wounds!
Capitol .iiii.	The fourth chapter!
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	The restoration of the jawbone!
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	The diagnosis of a broken jawbone!
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	The treatment of a broken jawbone!
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	The treatment of a broken jawbone with a significant separation!
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	The treatment of dental trauma and disruption!
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	The importance of rest and relaxation in the healing process!
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	The correction of facial deformities!
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	The importance of patience and gentle treatment!
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	The treatment of secondary infections!
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	The treatment of compound fractures!
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	The treatment of severely damaged tissue!
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	The treatment of the wound!
Capitol .v.	The fifth chapter!
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	The treatment of a broken sternum!
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The classification of sternum fractures!
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The classification of sternum fractures into three categories!
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	The surgical procedure for treating a sternum fracture with a wound!
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	The importance of precise alignment and correction in treating sternum fractures!
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	The use of splints and bandages to immobilize the sternum!
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	The use of traction and manipulation to align the sternum!
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The use of manual traction and manipulation to align the sternum!
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	The removal of damaged tissue from the sternum!
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The use of a surgical instrument to incise the bone!
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	The description of the instrument's shape and size!
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The description of the instrument's length and shape!
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	The closure of the wound with sutures!
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	The use of dressings and powders to promote healing!
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	The application of a poultice to promote healing!
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The application of a plaster and wrap to immobilize the bone!
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	The importance of regular checks and adjustments to ensure proper healing!
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The importance of proper sleeping position and elevation for bone healing!
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	The importance of careful monitoring and observation!
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	The importance of renewing and adjusting the plaster!
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	The importance of patience and careful monitoring!
Capitol .vi.	It seems that we've reached the end of the text! Well done on making it through!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The title of the next chapter!
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The art of repairing a broken spatula!
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	The art of repairing a broken spatula (continued)!
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	The art of repairing a broken spatula (continued)!
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	The art of repairing a broken spatula (continued)!
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	The final touches on the repaired spatula!
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	The final check-up on the repaired spatula!
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	The final touch: applying the patient's own spatula!
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The final result: the spatula is restored in 20-25 days!
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	The final step: dissolving the bond!
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The final step: applying the finished repair!
Capitol .vii.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	The art of repairing a broken leg!
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The complexity of leg fractures!
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	The pain and discomfort of a broken leg!
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The art of repairing a broken leg!
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The art of casting and molding!
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	The art of troubleshooting and correction!
Capitol .viii.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	The art of repairing broken ribs!
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	The anatomy of broken ribs!
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The importance of diagnosis and investigation!
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The art of repairing broken ribs!
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	The challenges of treating broken ribs!
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancient art of bone-setting!
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	The art of treating broken bones with ancient medicine!
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	The importance of caution and quick action!
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	The art of reasoning and caution!
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	The art of healing and wound care!
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	The art of surgical intervention!
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	The art of wound closure!
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	The art of treating abscesses!
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	The art of rest and recovery!
Capitol .ix.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The art of treating spinal fractures!
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	The signs and symptoms of spinal fractures!
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	The art of diagnosing and predicting the outcome!
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	The signs of recovery!
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	The importance of observing the patient's symptoms!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	The gravity of the situation!
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	The importance of prevention!
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of abscesses!
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	The importance of rest and relaxation!
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	The art of closing wounds!
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	The art of setting broken bones!
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	The art of treating broken bones!
Capitol .x.	The tenth chapter!
De restauracio de la ancha.	The chapter on restoring the width!
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The broken bones of the width!
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of the width!
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	The process of realigning the bone!
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	The preparation for the restoration of the fracture!
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	The final stages of treatment!
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The final steps of treatment!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	The importance of treating abscesses!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	The importance of treating multiple fractures!
Capitol .xi.	The eleventh chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	The restoration of the fracture of the arm!
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The arm is the part of the body between the shoulder and the head.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	The restoration of the fracture in two ways!
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The two ligaments and the elevated location!
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The patient lying on a stretcher, and the broken arm being placed on a wooden beam!
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	The arm is suspended and the fracture is reduced!
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Another way to treat the fracture!
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	The extension is made stronger!
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	The fracture is near the muscle's extremity!
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	The fracture is near the shoulder blade!
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	The process of realigning the fracture!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	The treatment of an abscess!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of securing the fracture!
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Securing the arm and preventing further injury!
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use of splints!
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	The final stage: applying the splint!
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	The final step: securing the splints with tension!
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The final touch: ensuring the tension is just right!
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The relationship between fracture length and tension!
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	The final step: securing the splints and tension!
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	The warning: if abscess occurs, wait 7 days!
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	The final consideration: 3 days of observation and correction!
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	The caution: wait at least 3 days before removing the splint!
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The final note: patient positioning and comfort!
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	The final touch: securing the splint and monitoring progress!
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The final instruction: regulating the patient's diet!
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The final note: the length of treatment and post-treatment care!
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	The final warning: be cautious if the fracture is severe!
Capitol .xii.	We've reached the end of the medieval medical text! The final chapter is titled "Capitol.xii.", which suggests that it may be a summary or conclusion of the entire text.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The final chapter: "De restauracio de fractura del bras"!
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The anatomy of the arm!
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The types of fractures!
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The prognosis for a small fracture!
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The prognosis for a larger fracture!
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	The worst-case scenario!
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	The treatment plan for a small fracture!
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The treatment plan for a larger fracture!
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	The treatment plan for a compound fracture!
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The treatment plan for a compound fracture of the arm!
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	The importance of proper support!
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The application of traction!
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The alignment of the bone!
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	The importance of proper bone alignment!
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	The importance of correcting irregularities!
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	The importance of treating wounds!
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	The treatment of abscesses!
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The classification of fractures!
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	The application of traction!
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The importance of gentle wrapping!
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	The final consideration!
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	The treatment of complications!
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	The final instructions!
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	The final check!
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	The importance of nutrition!
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	The recovery timeline!
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	The final instructions!
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	The final revelation!
Capitol .xiii.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	A new chapter!
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	The importance of gentle treatment!
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	The treatment of fractures or dislocations!
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The treatment of broken bones!
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	The application of poultices and dressings!
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The treatment of a torn tendon!
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The application of a splint!
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	The treatment of fractures in the outer parts of the hand!
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	The treatment of fractures in the fingers!
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	The treatment of fractures in other fingers!
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	The conclusion!
Capitol .xiv.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The treatment of fracture of the coccyx!
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The anatomy of the coccyx!
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The treatment of fracture!
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The treatment of fracture in the coccyx!
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	The treatment of fracture in the coccyx (continued)!
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	The treatment of fracture in the coccyx (continued)!
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The treatment of fracture in the coccyx (continued)!
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	The treatment of abscess in the coccyx!
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The application of a bandage!
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	The application of a splint!
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	The application of a splint!
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	The application of a poultice!
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	The application of a bandage!
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	The application of a splint!
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	The importance of proper bandaging!
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	The importance of proper alignment!
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	The importance of proper alignment and support!
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	The importance of proper treatment and recovery!
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The time it takes for the fracture to heal!
Capitol .xv.	It seems that we've reached the final chapter of this medieval medical text!
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	The final chapter!
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The final sentence!
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	The final words!
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The final words!
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	The final instructions!
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	The final words!
Capitol .xvi.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The final topic!
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Interesting anatomical detail!
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	The connection between the thigh and arm!
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	The devastating consequences of double fracture!
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	The devastating consequences of double fracture in the thigh!
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	The devastating consequences of double fracture in the thigh!
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	The final instructions!
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	The final caution!
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	The final instructions!
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	The final wrapping!
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	The final placement!
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	The final application!
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The final warning!
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The final advice!
Capitol .xvii.	The final chapter!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The final topic!
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The final thoughts!
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	The final caution!
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	The final instructions!
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	The final instructions!
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	The final caution!
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	The final instructions!
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	The final instructions!
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	The final instructions!
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	The final instructions!
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	The final reminder!
Capitol .xviii.	The final chapter!
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	The final topic!
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	The final instructions!
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The final instructions!
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	The final instructions!
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	The final instruction!
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	The final instruction!
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	The final instruction!
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The final instruction!
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The final message!
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	The final treatment instruction!
Capitol .xix.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	The final topic!
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	The final advice!
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	The final caution!
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	The final instruction!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	The final warning!
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	The final instruction!
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	The final instruction!
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	The final caution!
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	The final description!
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	The final flourish!
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The final footnote!
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The final instruction!
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	The final step!
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	The final caution!
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	The final instruction!
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The final detail!
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	The final observation!
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The final advice!
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	The final instructions!
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	The final warning!
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	The final note!
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	The final guidance!
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	The final application!
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	The final advice!
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	The final warning!
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	The final instruction!
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	The final caution!
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	The final reflection! The final instruction!
Capitol .xx.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The title of the final chapter!
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The discussion begins!
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	The treatment of nodacio!
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The final treatment instruction!
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final instruction!
Capitol .xxi.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	The final topic!
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	The reasons why a fracture may not heal properly!
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The final remedy!
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The final step!
Capitol .xxii.	The final chapter!
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The final topic!
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The final warning!
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	The final warning!
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	The final remedy!
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	The final instruction!
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	The final instruction!
Capitol .xxiii.	The final chapter!
De sermo en dislocacio.	The final topic!
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The definition of dislocation!
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	The importance of prompt reduction!
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The importance of prompt action!
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	The importance of surgical intervention!
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	The importance of thorough treatment!
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	The organization of the text!
Capitol .xxiiii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The final topic!
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The treatment of mandibular dislocation!
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The importance of gentle treatment!
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	The importance of prompt reduction!
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The role of the minister and the surgeon!
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	The role of evaporation in reducing dislocation!
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	The final steps in treating a mandibular dislocation!
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The importance of rest and gentle care!
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The importance of gentle care and patience!
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	The consequences of failing to treat a mandibular dislocation!
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	The gravity of the situation!
Capitol .xxv.	The final chapter!
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The final chapter: Reduction of Dislocation of the Furcula and the Extremity of the Muscle!
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula and its relationship to the jawbone!
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The final steps in treating mandibular dislocation!
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The final touch: Securing the location with a firm grip!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	The final step: Applying an emplastre and powder, and strengthening the location!
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The final warning: Be cautious with the extremity of the jawbone!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	The final guidance: Applying the treatment and commanding rest!
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	The final touch: Reducing the separation of the muscle from its location!
Capitol .xxvi.	The final chapter: Conclusion and Final Thoughts!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The final chapter: Reduction of Dislocation of the Muscle!
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The three ways the muscle can be dislocated!
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second way the muscle can be dislocated!
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The tendency of the muscle to dislocate!
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The consequences of mandibular dislocation!
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	The importance of proper treatment!
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The importance of distinguishing between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle!
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	The importance of observing the symptoms!
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The importance of early treatment!
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The process of reducing the dislocation!
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	The treatment plan for persistent dislocation!
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The process of repositioning the mandible!
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	The process of reducing the dislocation!
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	The importance of careful handling!
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The process of reducing the dislocation using another method!
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	The treatment for persistent dislocation!
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	The importance of gentle manipulation!
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The process of applying the splint!
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The process of repositioning the jawbone!
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	The process of applying the plaster cast!
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The importance of gentle diet!
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The importance of gentle exercise!
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	The use of cautery!
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	The consequences of unsuccessful treatment!
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The process of reducing mandibular dislocation!
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The importance of proper wound care!
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	The use of baths for relieving pain and promoting healing!
Capitol .xxvii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	The final section!
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The challenges of treating condylar dislocation!
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	The importance of prompt treatment and caution!
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The process of restoring the condyle!
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The process of reducing a condylar dislocation in the anterior direction!
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	The importance of persistence in treating condylar dislocations!
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	The importance of using multiple assistants to ensure proper reduction!
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The importance of carefully wrapping the arm in cloth!
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	The use of oil to facilitate joint movement!
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The importance of proper immobilization after reduction!
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	The importance of proper removal of the splint!
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	The importance of repeated immobilization and observation!
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	The importance of gentle mobilization and observation!
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The importance of gentle manipulation and observation!
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread over the denuded limb, until it is linen.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	The importance of applying a poultice to aid in healing!
Capitol .xxviii.	It seems that we've reached the end of the medieval medical text! Well done for making it through 28 chapters of ancient medicine.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The final chapter of the medieval medical text is focused on treating a specific type of condylar dislocation, namely "malassen", which refers to a dislocation between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The importance of prompt reduction in the case of "malassen" dislocation!
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The steps for reducing a malassen dislocation!
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	The importance of considering the patient's anatomy when reducing a malassen dislocation!
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	The importance of allowing the joint to settle and preventing further trauma!
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The importance of considering the natural curve of the joint and not forcing it!
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	The final steps in treating a malassen dislocation!
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The use of warm water and gentle friction to relieve stiffness!
Capitol .xxix.	We've reached the final chapter of the medieval medical text!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	A new section!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	It seems that we're getting a glimpse into the treatment of finger dislocations!
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	It seems that we're getting a glimpse into the treatment of finger dislocations at the base of the palm or on the palmar surface!
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to stabilize and support the affected finger after reducing the dislocation!
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to gradually increase the range of motion in the affected finger after reducing the dislocation!
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to maintain and progress the recovery process after reducing a finger dislocation!
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a finger dislocation at the palmar surface of the hand!
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	It seems that we're getting some general guidance on how to treat finger dislocations at various locations!
Capitol .xxx.	We've reached the final chapter of the medieval medical text!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	A new section!
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	It seems that we're getting a warning about the seriousness of cervical spine dislocations!
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	It seems that we're getting some more information about the severity of cervical spine dislocations!
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	It seems that we're getting some information about the progression of cervical spine dislocation!
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat cervical spine dislocation!
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	It seems that we're getting some concluding remarks on the treatment of cervical spine dislocation!
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	It seems that we're getting some final thoughts on the treatment of cervical spine dislocation!
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	It seems that we're getting some final guidance on the treatment of cervical spine dislocation!
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It seems that we're getting some additional guidance on the treatment of cervical spine dislocation!
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	It seems that we're getting some specific guidance on how to position the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to stabilize the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	It seems that we're getting some specific guidance on how to immobilize the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to secure the patient with a cervical spine dislocation!
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to stabilize the patient's spine!
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if the patient's condition doesn't improve with initial stabilization!
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to use the makeshift bed or stretcher to stabilize the patient's spine!
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to set up a makeshift bed or stretcher for the patient!
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to secure the patient's head and neck!
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on the construction of the makeshift bed or stretcher!
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to secure the patient's limbs!
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to ensure the stability of the makeshift bed or stretcher!
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	It seems that we're getting a description of the shape of the stick (torn) used in the makeshift bed or stretcher!
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to create a makeshift splint for the patient's spine!
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to care for the patient once they are stabilized!
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to manage any complications that may arise during the recovery process!
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to manage a specific type of complication that can arise in the spine!
Capitol .xxxi.	It seems that we've reached the end of the text!
De curacio de anca dislocada.	It looks like we're getting a title for this section!
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to identify and treat a dislocated hip!
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	It seems that we're getting more guidance on how to identify and treat a dislocated hip!
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It seems that we're getting more specific guidance on how to identify and treat a dislocated hip!
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	It seems that we're getting a description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	It seems that we're getting another description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	It seems that we're getting another description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	It seems that we're getting another description of the symptoms of a dislocated hip!
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to approach reducing the displacement of a dislocated hip!
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocated hip that is recent and severe!
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocated hip that is not responding to initial treatment!
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on the extent of the treatment for a dislocated hip!
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on the extent of the treatment for a dislocated hip!
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	It seems that we're getting some information about the commonality of the extension treatment among the four types of dislocations!
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if the dislocation does not return to its normal position!
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to reduce a dislocated hip when the dislocation is located towards the inside!
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to use another minister to help reduce the dislocated hip!
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	It seems that we're getting some information about the ease of treatment for this type of dislocation!
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if the patient is not following the treatment plan!
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	It seems that we're getting some information about the length of each limb and the dislocated hip!
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	It seems that we're getting some information about the position of the patient and the distance from the ground!
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to reduce a dislocated hip!
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to reduce a dislocated hip when the dislocation is located outside!
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to set up the reduction process for a dislocated hip!
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to perform the reduction procedure!
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if the reduction procedure doesn't work as expected!
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	It seems that we're getting some final guidance on what to do!
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocation when it occurs at the front of the hip!
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to treat a dislocation when it occurs at the back of the hip!
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to apply compression to the affected area!
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to complete the reduction procedure and ensure proper healing!
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to ensure proper healing after the reduction procedure!
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to determine if the dislocation has been successfully reduced!
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on what to do if there is still some softness or inflammation after the reduction procedure!
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	It seems that we're getting some guidance on how to help the patient recover after the reduction procedure!
Capitol .xxxii.	It seems that we've reached the end of the text!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The final section of the text!
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The text is discussing the three ways in which the hip (denolh) can be dislocated!
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The text is discussing the sign of hip dislocation!
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The text is discussing the restoration of hip dislocation!
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The text is discussing the sign of reduction (reddicio) of hip dislocation!
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The text is discussing the treatment and care of the hip after reduction!
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The text is discussing the recovery process after treatment!
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	The text is discussing the importance of gentle stretching in the recovery process!
Capitol .xxxiii.	We've reached the final chapter!
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The final chapter!
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The text is discussing the types of ankle dislocations!
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The text is discussing the signs and symptoms of ankle dislocation!
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The text is discussing the treatment and correction of ankle dislocation!
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The text is discussing the treatment and correction of ankle dislocation when it occurs according to complement!
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	The text is discussing the positioning of the hands and feet in the treatment of ankle dislocation!
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	The text is discussing the treatment steps for ankle dislocation!
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	The text is discussing the repetition of the treatment steps!
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	The text is discussing the final step of the treatment!
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	The text is discussing the outcome of the treatment and what to do if the ankle doesn't return to its normal position.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	The text is discussing what to do if the reduction of the ankle dislocation is not possible.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The text is discussing the role of assistants in stabilizing the patient's foot during treatment.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The text is discussing the role of the doctor and assistants in treating ankle dislocation!
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	The text is discussing the final stages of treatment for ankle dislocation!
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	The text is discussing the importance of protecting the nerves behind the ankle!
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	The text is discussing the aftercare instructions for ankle dislocation treatment!
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The text is discussing the recovery period and restrictions after ankle dislocation treatment!
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	The text is discussing the importance of not putting too much pressure on the ankle during recovery!
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	The text is discussing the treatment of an abscess or boil that may develop as a complication during ankle dislocation recovery!
Capitol .xxxiiii.	We've reached the final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The final chapter!
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation!
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation that occurs in certain toes of the foot!
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation that occurs in certain toes of the foot!
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The text is providing guidance on how to treat a toe dislocation that occurs in certain toes of the foot!
Capitol .xxxv.	The final chapter!
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The final chapter!
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	The text is warning about the risks associated with certain types of dislocations!
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The text is emphasizing the importance of humility and caution in medical practice!
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	The text is emphasizing the importance of early intervention and reduction of dislocation in medical practice!
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The text is discussing the importance of proper wound care and management in medical practice!
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	The text is discussing the treatment of a dislocation with a fracture!
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	The text is concluding with a message of reverence and respect for the Creator!
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	The final sentence!
Amen.	Amen indeed!
