Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the paragraphs of Albucazim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequences, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you complete what you want in this treatise, which is divided into operative parts, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the operation of my hand is spread out in our region and in our entire private time, until the very few people who possess the science of it, and its vigilant sight has been stopped; and there remains no remainder of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the waters and lead to those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated and its art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will vivify this hand in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come with the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as it is for addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why there is no artist who has mastered this art in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires the actor to have been exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen reconstructs until he knew the juices of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their position; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their sentiment.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates said that a name is vain, more in small works, and greatly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said this at the beginning of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they were formed in this science and got away from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you have seen a foolish doctor who, in his imprudence, has caused a scrophilous aposteme to occur on the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out until the woman died between their hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a trope of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called it a futile effort to extract that stone, and I saw that due to the greatness of the stone and due to the disposition of the patient's body, I knew that he would die under my hands.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he made a bad incision on the patient's thigh, which was devoured by the fracture in his hip; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and asters, using strong stretching, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And I followed the dislocations according to their desires, and I followed the relaxation, and I followed the loosening for some days and commanded that they not disturb the ligament; and it was thus until the thigh and foot became apostematous, and I saw them going to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have already called it futile, and I had to dislocate the ligament, and consequently I achieved tranquility and thus relieved them of their pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption had already spread to the member, so that I could not contain it, and I did not cease to walk with the corruption in the member until the patient suffered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the malignity of it was magnified in his lord's sense.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cancerous tumor is pure melancholic humor, therefore it does not fit that it would come from anywhere else, but rather it is in a member which suffers from everything, as if it were held hostage.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of my hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there is danger in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in every place of this book where I found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it alone, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are fallen and firm.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And you will be on the better way by the grace of God to obtain salvation and laudable success, and you will leave behind the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you will put away your arms from what makes you fear, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you will not be evasive: because more remains of your glory, and thus also in the world and afterwards among your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Because the disease has been diagnosed in certain morning hours:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	There is no medical treatment for evil, since bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have devoted this book to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and first of the primary partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ferrules of the cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second partition.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on scarification and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similarities to those, all capitulated and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third partition.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of torso correction and of similarities to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery I make a focus and acute medicine and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At this point begins the treatise on the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I have described the quality of the youthful judgments of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what complexity it is prohibited to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the youthful judgment of cautery and its instrument is a long and prolix sermon, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me it is enough to take a little from their sermons, fearing prolivity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery corresponds universally to all complexity, whether it is matter or matters, except for two complexities, which are warm complexities of matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In warm and dry complexity of matter they disagree; for some said that cautery is suitable for that, and others said the opposite, that cautery is not convenient in evil matter which is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that evil matter warm and dry be healed by cautery and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And they said to him who says the opposite, that by cautery it is made youthful judgment in all warm and dry evil matter that is seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity with the complexity of fire, you will find the body of man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through the sermon of that, that experience has already revealed to me many times what I have discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Moreover I do not think that anyone will surpass what has already been experimented and exhausted in the chapter on cautery through previous exercise, and to know the diversity of the complexity of men's bodies and the disposition of their evil matters in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Moreover in the other complexities, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid evil matters, because already all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree on the youthful judgment with cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery is fire and its goodness, so on cautery I make medicine combining, because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is a small nuisance.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Moreover the action of combining medicine reaches to that in the members which are affected by it, and strengthens them to come into the difficult-to-heal member and strengthens them to listen.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Moreover fire, by its sublime nature and good substance, does not do anything except to overflow. And it is already known to us through experiment and lengthy service of studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have been excused from the length of this sermon. And if it were not that it is not read in my book on this passage to you secretly hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the evacuation by which it expels evil matters, a philosophical demonstrated sermon, which would be acutely inserted in your pages.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to do cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the youthful judgment of that which I have done with cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fast, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared by those who come with evil, which is more than small harm entering at that time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus I do not catch in your pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that evil matter which is healed by cautery, there is no return to all time, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus because the doctors do not know that cautery is only in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries out the humors, which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Perhaps emperor, I will place a superior cautery above medicine to show the value and virtue of its operation and greatness of your noble lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the patient's illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in their body by the aggregation of superfluous humors, and that which they have acquired in their daily habits and semblance of those causes; but that the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in some members with few superfluous humors and humidity, thus as cautery of teeth for pain and semblance to that, it is possible that the pain does not return there, but rather is made small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is a common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, since they believe that it is not a cure that advances with medicine nor another cause that advances with cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not because they administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause they administer thus cautery, and it advances to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here I will say that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which common people and foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a break, as if it is not absolutely virtuous, because you have already proved and demonstrated that it does not make this except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; but emperor, when you make cautery with gold fire, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepare to receive freshness; and if you adjust above the ignited gold, it will melt into a pool, and sometimes in the pool certain laminas are made so that the artisan can occupy himself with it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is done to make cautery with iron, we should not push lightly and not postpone the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And now I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that it is clear to the demanding one what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for headache caused by coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, so it is the cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the shoulders and ears, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and semblance in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate in medicine lacative the whole month, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then to sit between his thighs on a bent bench and place his hands on his own feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then he places the razor in the palm of his hand, placing the paws on the razor at the bridge of the nose between the eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perhaps emperor, as the finger said from my middle place has arrived, it signs that place with a probe, and then lights the cautery iron of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then he places it on the marked place with a probe, in a manner that descends, in which the finger of the hand is constricted little by little, and you revolve it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then he lifts his hand lightly and regards the place, and if you see already from the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then he lifts his hand, and if it does not turn to his hand in that iron, in another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the bone what I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and let it sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the wrapped cotton in a bundle and let it sit until the crust of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with four-part remedy until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And I said that when the Roman plague breaks out, it is better to take the arm, because it is more beneficial and cures quickly.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	I said that some of them should be cauterized on the back of the bone, and hold the cautery until it reaches a certain part of the spine.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then it is necessary to adjust the bone, and then it should be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	I said that others should apply the cautery to the back, until it penetrates deeply into the bone and strengthens it so much that the bone breaks, and this is the method of healing a small fracture.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And I believe that from that place, the vapors of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it has been held in the open plague for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have never seen these two special kinds of cauteries, except in some homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, it is better for my health, when it is; because the head is deviated from the solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is more safe and better for my health; and from that house and I do that work for my health.
Capitol segon.	It follows accordingly.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the whole head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in a prolonged patient, and uses remedies such as poultices and bandages and plasteres and injections and catheters and girdles, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not profit from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and atrophied much fear, then that cautery is another cautery beneath that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that above the horn of the dry head with a cautery until the bone is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the bone and discover the quantity of it that we have recounted and cauterize that with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called "vas" — and it is that place where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient will feel much greater diverse pain than the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it is known that the cautery which cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	The third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-ancient migrating [or wandering] pains.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain dwells in the head and is stubborn, or it is a pain that penetrates deeply into the vein, then evacuate with medicines thatmondify the head, and administer another cure, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if there is no profit, then cautery is done in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	One cautery with acute burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrub it and bind the extremities of it to both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the deep location beneath the bone, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen it above with a stopped constriction, and let it be for the space of three hours; and then dissolve it and extract the salt, and let the plague be for two or three days, and then pause over the submerged joint in a bandage until the place makes a scar.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, make some burning medicines, which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	One cautery with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cauterizing which this is the form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus in the form of a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause over the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath is not disturbed — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it which is disturbed by the spine of the bone thus as much as its greatness, and hold your hand so that the artery is not disturbed beneath, so that there comes no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak the joint in salt water and pause it over the place, and let it be for three days; and then hold the joint wrapped in a bandage, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, burn the extremity of the gut with a cautery according to the cautery, and beware not to make an incision in the artery during this emigration, lest it become non-ancient.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient emigration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat emigration as we have said about previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not last with what we have said of the first cautery in medicine or of the cautery in focus, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery tool until it is whitened, because it indicates above the line of the long disease where the greatest pain is, or whatever; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen that before you incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by the action of chewing, and that the tendon does not become inflamed and the nerves do not undergo evil, lest there be no spasmodic contraction.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is blocked, because in the blockage of it there is fear, and greater to that which ignores what it does and is not studious and experienced; and thus begins the operation on it at the commencement.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find in remembrance of the rule for the flow of blood by chance of the artery according to the usual manner, in the same place of this free book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not last with this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, burn it in the middle place of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stricture of artery by cautery having two sides, and it is a better cauterying this way and more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with causal laxatives and another treatment which has been said in the division, and the pain does not diminish, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named punctual, of which this is the form.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the point at the ignition, and it should be led around the entire ear thus as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of some things if the pain is somewhere.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Also, you have the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, because then you will feel the place in tension.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you make points of the cautery throughout the entire ear, and thus it is, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of gout.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Gout which is treated and with cauterying is not only of the species that come by flow, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of gout with roots and head-purgings and garglings, and do not complete your treatment, then it is necessary to cautery the illness with three cauteries: the first makes the root of the ear, and the second a little below the same temple, and the third makes the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the opposite of the ailing part, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterying is that you cautery it with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, thus elevating a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the said bone, and pause your hand at the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specificity of the codena is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of the gut, the form of which is demonstrated in a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	Moreover, it is necessary to subtily burn a little thus as you see; and it is necessary to cut in it with excessive fatness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place where it is demonstrated by process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter seven.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and do not complete your medicine and the illness has no fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: above all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, thus as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said below.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And you have been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more serious; and then you should be carefully treated so that the procedure progresses.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	About the cauterization of oblivion made through weakness.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Because they have given to the patient in the beginning of the illness great and powerful pills, magnificent servants.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then you should take off the entire head of the patient and place it on the wooden board of that described instrument in the treatise on instruments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place those few burned areas, because that is the manner of cauterizing.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to those methods in order, which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And then if the patient is not better; and if so, then make three cauterizations on the rear part of his head, which are dependent on the upper part of the head going into the part below the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cauterization the thickness of the digit, and then take care to make the cauterization so that it proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you find that the patient is more tolerant, then make the cauterization in the middle place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then take care that it enters so that it heals; and let the olive-shaped cauterization be according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	About the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Because you should proceed in magnificent decoration of the head with jars and as we have said; and then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a pointed cautery on the middle place of the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize on the rear part of it, and make three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those patients who are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cauterization so that it is combined with the coding motion of it, and lift the dead flesh.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then take care that it enters so that it heals, and let this olive-shaped cauterization be.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	About the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not that the epileptic is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to weakness.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And then it is necessary to decorate the brain of the patient at the beginning of his years and another cure which we have described in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gentle and soothing servants of magnificent decoration, beforehand with those for many days, in the blessing of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a pointed cautery on the middle place of the head according to the preceding manner, and another cauterization on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head it should be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauterizations that I have said, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive-shaped cauterization be according to what has been previously stated.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	About the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and great weakness, then cauterize it with the cauterizations that we have said in having paralyzed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous and declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give to drink what purifies the brain of it according to what has been previously stated in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then take off the patient's head, and then make a gentle and decent torture of those things above the circle, and then place it in the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated comfortably, and should be held firmly by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then place a liniment; it is better to use an ancient remedy for old wounds.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which is said to be sufficient when it is mixed in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle place of the head of it in the circle, and let it enter so that it is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do it so that the patient is in total recovery one time, with another regimen of good being until it is healed; or if you want, cauterize it making small points according to the size of it, but holding the hand with a pointed cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that humidifies the brain in equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then stop that constricted gut in a bath or in wraps of warm water.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	About the descent of hot water into the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the commencement of hot water into the vein through the channels which you had previously designated in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient whose head you will modestly cover, and guard against all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sugar dissolve in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that same place with a cautery; and then cauterize that same place with two cauteries on the two temples if it is the commencement of the flow of hot water into two veins, or one side if it is the commencement of the hot water in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	You will cauterize all the veins and arteries that you had previously indicated in the code; and place the cauteries at that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, stop with some medicine, which is as possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find the wisdom which is in extraction of arteries and absorption of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized at the neck below two bones with two cauteries, which subsequently produce a separation.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	About the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the veins are old and worn out and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize that same cautery which we have recounted in the chapter about the commencement of hot water flowing into the veins, and cauterize in the same place on the head and with two cauteries on the neck below the temples, and with two cauteries on the neck below the bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need addition, then cauterize that in all length of the vein on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	About the cauterization of nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that same thing which we have said in the division and do not hasten your treatment, then prepare and give to drink to the patient three nights; and place his head, and cauterize with a cautery more mild than an olive-tree cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that same place with a clave-cautery and two cauteries on the two eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery which you do not injure there.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the clave-cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	About the cautery for softening of eyelids of the veins.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the vein is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery according to this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a small one with two cauteries in all division, and it is prolonged to the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And it is the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	About the cautery of the eyelid of the vein when the hairs are converted into the internal parts and pierce the vein.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the vein are converted into the internal parts and pierce the vein, cauterize in those places according to two manners, because the cautery is either with iron or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to hold still that which reads the hairs thus as those which are worldly, until they are prolonged and grafted; and if you pierce that which is not in its place, then strengthen the veins of that one with a band so that it is not moved until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and grafted, then stop the head of the patient in the true seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of that one with a tent, with a signal which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and it is the commencement of the proper signal of the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then stop constricted gut in a bath of warm water or in an application of poultice over the vein.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize upon the figure which has been signed, little by little, in well-regulated motions, until the surface of the code is burned, which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, totally and properly apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of good health in the body's work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already constricted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	So lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place your hand over the affected area to ensure that the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that wound thoroughly until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns to its original state for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another pass with the cautery on that entire area as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is equalized, so that the skin does not puncture the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift their skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a paper template in the shape of a mitre leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some soothing ointment and apply it to the living flesh of an unbroken wound. I think there might be a small mistake! It seems like you accidentally sent a single period instead of a new sentence to translate. If you meant to send a new sentence, please go ahead and share it, and I'll be happy to help! or that water, and then mix those causes well, and make that fastening per so that it is not frozen; and then spread it over the paper which was made thus in the shape of a mitre leaf, and place that over one eye of the patient, and place below the eye wrapped in albumen of egg white, and the head of the patient should be in the correct position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient does not feel the bitterness of the medicine, because the bitterness is in it as from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then as you perceive that the bitter taste is gone, then release the medicine and rub it on the finger; then cease the bitterness, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as it is washed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it is; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was not applied and does not deteriorate until the operation is equalized and the eye is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the affected area to ensure that the pain of the adjustment is eradicated, and then cure that wound thoroughly or otherwise until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep vigilant diligence so that the medicine does not fall into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened over several days and some cause of skin punctures the eye, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it inwards until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a mitre leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men are diversified according to greatness and smallness, and thus according to what is done your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it will not be forgotten the way of straightening to that one who has studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head thus in the correct position, and hold the head of some minister between the eyes but in such a way that it is neither forgotten nor agitated in the correct head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the affected area wrapped in egg white or in a poultice of plant material over the patient's eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be conical, thus as it is in the shape of a reed or a point of a turning pen, from one extremity to where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out thus as it was held.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But perhaps that which is burnt is better for the body's work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then take out the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the blood and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then operate on that and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery that is well ignited, and you have that in your hand a little while before the cautery of the eye at the bridge of the nose, so that it does not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the corners of the eye and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then at the beginning of the eye cautery, you see into the bone, it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place your hand over the affected area to border and wrap it in a dry dressing until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And it is another manner of cautery for a fistula, which the ancients first discovered: then at the place of the fistula and make a hole there and stop in that fissure subtly as its form allows; And put there a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and you hold your hand firmly with good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the hollow of that; and cover that you place over the hollow of the patient with an album of egg white or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed in that which we have spoken of concerning the cautery and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the body according to how it will come into its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the fracture of the toes.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Crushed herbs applied to the fissures on the lips, and especially to the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures in that which we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your care, then ignite the small cuticular cautery according to this form that is written:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And it is the conquest of it according to the subtlety of the skin.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then stop putting that initiative carefully into those fissures until the cautery penetrates to the root of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that with cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess is formed and then it breaks, and then it ruptures, and then it becomes chronic, and you correct the break and it is made into a fistula, and then you cure that and do not deepen your care, then stop igniting the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignition in the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the root of it, and afterwards make an application or two; and then take care of that as we have said concerning the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is abscessed and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to how it will come into its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loosened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then stop placing the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come thus, even so that you place the scalpel over the tooth and enter it there the ignited cautery festinatingly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then iterate the cautery with some crushed herbs according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should hold their mouth full of salt water and keep it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the loosened tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is stiffened and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or there is a worm or vermin in it, or it does not confide in the cure with medicine, then cautery is applied to that in two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in iron water, and then take it out and wrap it over the extremity of the tent, and then submerge it in boiling water, and stop it on the painful tooth festinatingly until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then iterate that with some crushed herbs until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge the flax or cloth in the aforementioned cow's horn, and stop it on the painful tooth, and stop over that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, the emperor forbids the cautery with fire unless you attend to the quantity of iron or of fire, and it is in the heart of some gross ulceration and the acuity of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and stop it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; and make some crushed herbs because the pain will be relieved or on that day or on another day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And you should cover the area where that cautery touched the patient's good mouth with a bandage, and hold it for an hour, then remove the dressing; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	You should cauterize at the point where you see extreme pain, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the pipe or tube.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of crooked toes.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When toes are crooked due to flux and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines, and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is thus, having two burned extremities so that the fumigation comes out of the cautery through the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if you indicate that of it, until you reach the root of the aposteme.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and leave it for three days and pause on the inflamed area in a good way until what the fire has consumed is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wound with ointments and dressings until it is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the pipe or tube for cautery is thus, conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of hernia and constriction of the spleen.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with cold complexity, then cover that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which goes to the root of the ulcer in the pre-affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not penetrate with the cautery to the ulcer nor burn the skin of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery which goes to the joint of the spine at the back of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be clavilated according to the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that wound which has been previously mentioned until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughs and diseases of the lung are from cold humors and the patient has no fever nor tisis, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the pre-affected areas of the loins and hips; and with another cautery in the middle area of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be clavilated according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, in the form which precedes in the pointing of pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points until they reach those; and then heal that wound which has been previously mentioned until it is healthy.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And thus the cautery has three ramps because cauterization is thus: in one way you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of twitching that is at the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not stop at the hour of its return, until it returns to its usual custom, and then by a small movement it is displaced thus that it ends, thus as we have testified, then cover that primarily you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is reversed over the two or on the side; and then elevate the skin which is in the upper part of the citillic to the parts above with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated above.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtleties according to the quantity of tension; and this is its form.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some occasions are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cautery, which is good for salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and it is thus done, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilated cautery or with many pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humors come into the stomach, extracting its complexity and thus multiplying the raumases within it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confuse, then cover that the patient is on their back with their arms extended and their thighs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a clavilated cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the chest; until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate among those who are not adjusted, so they will not make an error.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery reaches the quantity of the two stubborn roots of the greatness of the codena.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery is added in this way, And if you want, make a great cautery in the middle of the stomach in this way; and let it be a cautery in the form of a circle in this way.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cautered at the point where it is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to hold, and then cautered in those points; and then cure with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cautery of the fevered foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the foot hurts from coldness or dampness or gross excess of wind that disrupts its normal complete function, and it is cured with water as we have said, and not comforted, then it is necessary that the malady be resupinated above its cervix, and you feel with a tender hand three cauteries according to this form and quantity measured on the foot below the hips, which perceives the decubitus of the same.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the greatness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not comprehend your hand with the moving cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the magnitude of the specificity of the codena, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the malady stands on its feet; and if it does not stand, then let it be seated, which has already extended its thighs, and elevated its shoulders.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you can cauterie these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the specificity of the entire codena be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the body and penetrates into the intestines, because the codena here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an ulcer or abscess occurs on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the malady becomes more grave and the pain is increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is greatly increased and sometimes the doctors are tired of curing it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the malady be turned above its cervix; and then feel the place of the abscess with a tender hand; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rag, in the form of which I have written on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterie with that cautery until the entire codena is consumed, until it reaches the siphac, until it arrives at a healthy sanity.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by curing other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not suitable that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are recognized; however, I have experimented with some vigorous practices being carried out above this operation, however, I will leave that to you, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery of flatulence.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology for flatulence are made according to this manner, being a doer, and it is that which you take from the roots of Aristology, a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the greatness of the finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it at the fire, and then cauterie with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one declining to the part that is beneath the beard, and make two cauteries on that which declines between the fifth rib and the cistern, declining slightly towards the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle of the foot, and another above the stomach, and three cauteries from the back parts; and make one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not suitable that you comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be in the manifestation of the codena in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And I have already said to the other ancients that they are similar to those of men who use iron cauteries resembling a ray and ignite them, and place them in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and healthy sanity is forgotten, just as we have said about the abscess on the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	More in this perforation I do not use cautery, because it often happens that an abscess forms at the site of the fistula, which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the spleen as we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cautery is done in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four linear incisions according to the length of the spleen, following the shape of the cauteries of the foot, whose shape has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And it is between each cautery the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery is the same as we have said in the cautery of the foot, equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not comprehend your hand at the cautery; and the disease is evident on both sides of the back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterying, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two vertebrae, which causes have been said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and it raises the codeine which is at the end of the spleen where it perceives the sinister influence of the disease.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And it is your elevation where you raise the codeine according to the length of the body, so that you make several cauteries according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then introduce the two vertebrae, setting them in motion, in that entrance where they penetrate the codeine of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus you make four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cautery with a cautery having three vertebrae.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery, so that it has laid aside to grasp or to hold for three days, because more often it is comfortable than the other preceding causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery of hydropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not made in hydropsy except at a precise point.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat hydropsy, the methods of treatment are those which have been said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries in the circuit of the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the foot, and another on the spleen, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the specificity of the codeine.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it holds for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the disease from treatment then with the cautery as it is necessary that they be added to the two intentions, and it will be fastened to the aid of health.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery is what is cauterying the belly is club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is what is cauterying the back is olive-shaped according to its preceding shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by hydropsy and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, in a place that is between the auricular and the anular, and raise your hand over the cautery and do not touch it; and then raise your hand, and do not return it completely, because the stagnant water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the extremity of the cautery, cuticular.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery is according to the length of the thigh: one below the knee and another at the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the open wound for a long time, so that some stagnant water may come out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure them with those causes which have been said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the belly and intestines.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly and intestines are cold and humid, so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which is in the stomach and bowels, and it is cured with those methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the suffering disease suffers from exhibiting cauteries of virtue, then cautery that with a large cautery on the navel according to what has preceded in the cautery of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the subtle circuit of the navel, with a club-shaped subtle cautery; and a cautery on the alcatin above great aloes, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidities exhibit and the disease is tolerating, then cautery that on the peritoneum and on the bowels, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, because it is a perfect cure of juvament from which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old hemorrhoids in the nature of the body are caused by gross humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured with what has been said in the division and do not confer the usual cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small triangular spine, and cauterize underneath the umbilical region for two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that their stomach is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is sometimes inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and make one cautery on the thigh, and another on the middle of their back with a clavicular cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time opened, and afterwards cure them from within so that they may be healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of athelia, appropriate for their abscesses.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess athelia, then you ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into that abscessed athelia, and finally place your hand so that you reach the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes out.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a vein or two, because if they achieve healing, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and afterwards cure those with what confirms their healing from within so that they may be healthy.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more suitable for youthful treatment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the body in their divided parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with cauteries.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you have a fistula in the nature of the body, and it is old, corroding the sanity of the patient and corrupted humidity, and therefore it is more worthy that the covering is what proceeds with subtlety, and afterwards consider the quantity of the depth of the aforementioned tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the tent.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat above that cautery within so that they burn those corrupted bodies entirely one, two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place within so that it may be healthy.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and you have abscessed from it the matters, and remained thus for a long time, then know that it has been entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters have not been removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the prison of the corrupted bone, or something from those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross windiness, and thus the hollow of the patient's thigh is affected, then it is necessary that you cauterize above the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clavicular cautery from which proceeds the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And make a strong cauterization on the second small spine, so that three linear cauteries come, and then they will be more suitable for youthful treatment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize above the part below on the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of the notes of the foot; and cauterize above with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And a clavicular cautery according to what has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the matrix (womb).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the matrix (womb), and thus conception is prohibited, and their menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there is pain in the vicinity of them, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical region, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery above the place below on the back, or two cauteries, and let the cautery be clavicular.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture accumulates and is stuck in the joint of the ankle, and it is caused by cold humors that settle in the lower part of the leg, and it is shown that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is palpated on the boy's thigh.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have felt it in the circuit of the joint thus as it is revolving, and so that the joint falls into its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that man with three cauteries or olive-shaped grande cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And this is the way to make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire spine; and then take care that it is healed within.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain goes to the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said before, and not confused, and that is antiquated, then you should release the patient from gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize him.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauterizes him on the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do so at a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And that is the space which is between each cautery, the quantity of the thickness of the said and if the olive-shaped or large cauteries.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Moreover, some veins are cauterized on the same place on the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle in which the form is precised in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, there where the circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire spine.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cautery in certain cases when pain is adhering to the ankle and does not extend within to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Moreover, if it is extended within to the thigh, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the knee joint for four digits above the affected part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and this is the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the spine.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is extended to the place near the toes, then cauterize him here where he feels it with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is suitable for him.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him here with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that it burns nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's bad nourishment or contradiction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one or another of those who cauterized on the knee joint and ultimately in the cauterization, and the burning fire inflamed within so that the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong abscess occurred in the belly, and then this leads to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle joints, where this is the manner: make a circle of iron like a ring, the circumference of which is the width of a palm; and it should be of the same size as the thickness of a finger bone or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle is another circle; and the space between them is the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and those circles are separated into two parts; and the length of those channels is one notch or two notches, and make a decent iron margin in those circles; and this is their form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be ignited in the fire until it is red-hot and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the ankle joint, the patient collecting himself on the side of the bed.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize him with three red-hot cauteries in one vein.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a poultice to the wound and leave it for many days; and then take care of him until he is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Says Albucassis: Oh, my sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for that reason few have found those who regard it above.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of those who suffer from cauteries on their body, and it is necessary to search for that place on their body.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Many cauteries are medical treatments that adhere to you making two circles having perforated armor in which they place the hinge of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the nakedness of their shoes, or those who have two nails or heels.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces which are between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and there are holes above and below, and it is necessary to contain them among their following this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then stop on the affected part of the water, the patient sitting on a mattress, and grasp your hand on the affected part of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and you do that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the adjustment of it — because that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and evacuate the hot water from all of the affected part into warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that for three days and stop on that boundary until the blackness of the adjusted remaining parts, and leave that for several days, and correct their porridge; this is the last step in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make a statue of it that contains water according to what is done in the affected limb.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkaline and cause not extinct of both hands on one affected part, and sprinkle them and stop in a new vessel where the affected part below is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And stop below the bottom of another vessel inserted, and gather above that alkaline and cause living with warm water which takes those for a finger, and since you comprehend those are good compression, and leave the hole that sends from the sharp water in the affected part below to the inserted vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and gather it above another living cause and other alkaline renovating, because that hour will be very strong acuity, which is administered in many operative functions of medicine and in cautery of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are those which are cautery-ized thickly, thus as you describe and mix and create a compound with a savory cause in such a way that they are well mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure with which he cures pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be that one, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed for a season thus as recommended, because strong he inserts in bath and thus already knows of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he takes certain green herbs, and if they are not found fresh, take recent figs; and much should be sprinkled in a few gray areas and stopped on the affected water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it is bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is relaxed, insert that into the soil, because the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And I know that you do not need to use cauteries in these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Many times Escorides says that when an ulcer of a goat's vein is cautery-ized, it is beneficial for his body; and this is the cautery in his following manner: take wool and dip it in hot oil, and stop it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's fat and inflame that with fire until it becomes charcoal; and then stop it on the wool and leave it until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat that, and do not stop until the sensation of the biting pain passes into the water and stops the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cautery of cows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the toes are caused by multiple causes, such as by contusion or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not effective except in this one species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore it is necessary, then evacuate the affected part with fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of the body, because you have tenths in each line or cauteries or more, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the affected part and its virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a pointed cauterization, do so with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four at the middle clavicle, following this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motions weakened by this illness in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they stumble upon their structure, with difficulty in walking and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And vertebrae in the upper part of the back and ribs that have already begun to overlie each other.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize with that cautery that is circular in shape.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the vertebrae, including the joint.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And place the points properly between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the area inside, which will be healthy with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then how gout caused by cold is cured in a manual way of cure and the pains are not relieved, then relief comes from cauteries.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you perform cauterization with proper evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-shaped cautery is the one whose form is this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains penetrate into the teeth or other joints, and they are very weakened, then cauterize that over each tooth with three cauteries or four of the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, just enough to surround the outer surface of the code.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate into the tooth and back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the jaws, and it is called scurvy, then puncture around the circle of the gums thus as they revolve, puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the teeth, then puncture around the circle of the gums over each notch and over the edge of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains penetrate almost to the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected parts of the entire joint.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and weakness is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are torn apart from the cavity to the genitals, and it begins to suppurate, then you should order the patient to stay in their bed for seven days and use gentle causes so that the wound of the seventh day may heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands over the seventh vertebrae, and command them to hold their seven wings within so that it may be firmly held or the cavity or intestines may not protrude.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the teeth and sinew, holding the rupture over the bone of the pentagonal shape at the extremity of which it is similar to the circle of the subdivisions of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery whose form is this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is very red and has many sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery straight, and you will see that it includes the bone of the pentagonal shape into the middle of the forehead; and if it does not succeed in the first attempt, try again another time until it succeeds.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the hour of your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine so that on the patient no death or other great evil may come.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	You should know that when you hold the cautery, do not touch the bone, and it does not interfere with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle, according to their age and measure of theirs.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, until the scar is reduced by the heat.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of those who have other afflictions until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should sit on the warm seat for 40 days until the place and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to pause the nutrition of him according to the length of time of his cure, which relieves the stomach of him, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when one wants to get up after 40 days, then administer the decent and gentle treatment, and hold that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it is necessary to moderate the effort and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of health, they will be completely healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will direct the cure of the ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that they do not hurt, then cauterize the rupture with the red-hot cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is what is exhorted from the codena, thus like the third part of it; and then take care of him who has said that, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And you will find some first rupture experts who say that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is signaled in the tents:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a paused line that is for the latitude in the lattice because it surpasses the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand on a clave cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of the thigh.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain is felt in some members due to a fall or percussion and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the entire member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of the thigh and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is not healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then try again on him with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured in a member next to that one, so that it is necessary to continue with the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous wounds are treated with a cautery for great benefit, and magnificently if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And thus when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and as that cure which we have said in the division and not delayed, nor this, and fear about the patient whose corruption comprehends all of his body and all of its complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle place of the head, and one below it, and one at the end of the hair; and two above the horns; and one behind, above the nape or service.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand on the cautery a little while until it makes a small impression on the bone, and from it the scorched parts are dislocated, so that the exhalation of gross vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the worse places according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and cauterize on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on each vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each calf, and one on each ankle, and two on each foot, and one on each toe; and cauterize that on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the muscles, and on the tendons of the thighs; and treat them with those cauteries.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are above the ankle that you do not touch them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are treated with a cautery on the bone of the pentangle and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you should know that the more adjusted cauteries, the more beneficial and convenient they are; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus like the wise ones, because the body of him is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	It seems that the treatise is written in a Romance language, possibly a mix of Old Occitan and Medieval Latin.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then heal the cautery wounds with a poultice made from herbs, in a mixture of honey and another treatment within, so that it may be healthy."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter 48"
De cauterizacio de stupor.	"On the Cauterization of Stupor (Fainting)"
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	"When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauterization according to the size of the member or its smallness."
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	"And let the fire of the cautery enter into the narrowness of the channel in a little while."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then heal that one with an ointment until it is healthy."
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	"And sometimes some numbness is cauterized in certain stupors which affect the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and it is said that the numbness of the nerves is what moves that member, and the stupor is relieved."
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	"There is no progress on this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter 49"
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	"On the Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea (a skin disease)"
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	"When ulcers are old and do not respond to the treatments of medical ointments, then you cauterize over them with a pointed cautery for a little while according to the quantity of the specific condition of the channel until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed."
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	"And then heal that one with a poultice made from herbs and lentils, with rose oil and leaves of agrimony, and the blood of pigeon or the blood of crane, each being a part and all are mixed together, and then place a bandage over it and leave it on for a while until it is healed."
Capitol .l.	"Chapter 50"
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"On the Cauterization of Cancer"
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that one with a circular cautery in the circumference of it, just as it is turned around."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	"And I advise the experts that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and yet I have seen some numbness."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	"And it is better to cauterize in the circumference of it with a circle as we have said, or with many small cauteries."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter 51"
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"On the Cauterization of Weakness (or Debility)"
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"When some weakness is delayed in maturity, and thus it is due to the superfluity of making that, or because of the state of illness, since it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to restore it to maturity; then cauterize around its circuit with many small pointed cauteries; and afterwards let it be, for it will fasten in maturity."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"If you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then you should ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause it in the middle place of the weakness until it penetrates the channel."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you cauterize in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that one until it is healthy."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter 52"
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"On the Cauterization of Corrosion (or Ulceration)"
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Corrosion is a corrupting disease that walks in the member, which corrodes it thus as a fire that consumes dry wood."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	"Therefore, if you want to cauterize that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cauteries with fire, then you should ignite cauteries with many small keys, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is."
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	"And then cauterize that entire part until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	"And then let it be for three days, and pause over the cauterized places with a mixture of oil and herbs until the scars are entirely eradicated and all corruption."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	"And then heal that one with flesh-growing ointments."
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	"If then, after three days, the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over that which remains corrupted in the corrupt places."
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	"And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with sharp medicine, because that is mixed in place of cautery."
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	"Moreover, emperor's cautery with fire is to be used for a lighter treatment."
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	"And I have said the treatment of it with sharp medicine in division, and so take that when its hours are ending."
Capitol .liii.	"Chapter 53"
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	"On the Cauterization of Fractures and other Similar Things"
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Swollen veins located at the affected parts of the foot, which are called claws, and it is a gross, inflamed cause, which hurts the foot; and it is treated with two kinds of cauteries, one with fire and another with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Maybe the cautery with fire is that which you should ignite the cautery resembling a ball of tow, which must be made of iron according to the quantity it contains in each claw of the entire affected part, and it should have subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then stop the ignited fire on the claw, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in a circular motion around the claw until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until you start to feel better.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with mallows and savings thrice crushed in salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place affected by generating flesh until it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and swollen veins accumulate on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer those cauteries with hot water, and it is that you take a small tube of iron or fire or ball of tow, and stop it on the claw; and put a little quantity of hot water, and hold your hand, and you rotate it with compression of your entire hand, and it should be inserted into the margin of the tube in the root of the claw, and bring out the hot water through the orifice of the root of the claw; and wait for the patient to feel a little burning from the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus you do to those and then proceed to the other until you overcome all the affected parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those pus wounds because the roots of the claws are eradicated, and the flesh will be generated.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 3.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you find a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to fever from a cold cause, or for another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cautery with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and you cautery on their chest, and on their stomach, you cautery on the olive-shaped part.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of theirs is restored and fixed with the healthiness of the affected coldness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 4.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Wounds of the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is afflicted with accidental wounds, and it has pus-filled abscesses which are made of gross corrupt materials; therefore, at the beginning, it appears that it should be cauteryed over every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of long-lasting erestology; or with a slow-acting cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And swollen veins are cauteryed at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed, and the excess is disrupted, making them healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Maybe the emperor will then make it so that evacuation with phlebotomy is done properly.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the Cauterization of Bloody Fluxes Caused by Incision of Arteries.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Swollen veins are found in fluxes of arteries that are cut by the wound which is made beforehand, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when you reach that point, then you should hold with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop there until the swollen veins are obstructed so that the fluxes of blood from the artery are stopped, and do not flow out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then stop at the fire with olive-shaped cauteries few and large, by name of many, and blow on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly holding the orifice so that you may retain it, and hold the cautery until it is bound and restored to that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you retain the orifice and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restored.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not injure the nerves which are here, and that another evil does not come upon the affected part.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when the artery flows with blood, then it is not possible to restore the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: either cautery as I have said, or extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted, the extremities of my veins are injured and the blood is restored; or that it is tied with a faithful ligature or with a strong structure, or that they are stopped over the medicines from which the virtue is to restrain the blood; and they are strengthened in a pulvinar constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Those who administer restrictions on the limb and strictures in the arm or by position of combustive causes and similarities, do not comfort but rather irritate.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Perhaps if you have endeavored to find the appropriate medicine, and there is no doctor present, then make a pause in the treatment indicated on the orifice of that vein, as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the blood is obstructed by the superior part of the plague, and concerning the artery it is not rejuvenated; and concerning the artery, it is aspurgated with much hot fluidity within which the blood is congealed and grossly swollen; and perhaps you should cauterize or use necessary medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	It begins the second treatment.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and fontanels and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the teachings of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have said in the first chapter all about the malady in which cautery is convenient and combustive medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I will order the chapters according to the subordinate title of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it may be alleviated there, then on that which will have been demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And then that I begin here, certainly, sons, who learn that in this chapter it is to be feared that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which certainly is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made with blood from the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exit or purification of the wound or extraction of sagitta or incision of stone and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those accompany fear and trembling and in their end, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that concerning you, nothing falls in which is established, because some evacuations occur due to your manual skills of men, manual skills very prone to maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is certain that they flee from their malady and are far from death, and thus for the vehemence of that which finds its malady, and for the length of the malady of him, and in the malady is fear for that which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is that which gives to your son to have and said, you hoping in that health, and the sixth malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not think that you consent to that which comes from the one who is this manual; and your caution should be greater than what you have considered and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause about that unless certain science verifies it for you, and at which you perceive laudable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies of prognosis and indication of him who is converted health, because in that one you are helped above acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters according to what proceeds in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from the head to the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you what you demand and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the cure of water retained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this malady many evacuations endeavour to infants from infancy and when the nurse strengthens the head of the infant with its livelihood.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some evacuations endeavour for a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	Perhaps you have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom I have seen are caught by death, and thus it is to me a saddened work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified until it ceased not to be measured by the greatness of his head, and perhaps the humidity made the focus mortal.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the codeina and the bone, or is added beneath the bone over the siphac.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that case the humidity is between the codeina and the bone and the aposteme is small, then it is convenient that you make in the middle of the head a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatulum.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the aposteme is larger, then there are two fissures here according to this manual.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is beneath the bone, it is signified by him that you empty the compartments of the head, full of all parts and the water is expressed when you comprehend that in the tie and at the internal parts and it is not what you hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You find three cracks in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the cracks with draps and plumassols; and then enclose above it on the sixth day, and then dissolve the lien and cure the plague with tentacles and poultices, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers how to bring out the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated areas are more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the return of water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid fluent flows of blood and harm the patient with that flow of blood in evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	The incision of the arteries which are close to the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter following.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are many catarrhs or rheumas in the veins or at the feet, and it is an old thing, and it does not trust in that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then you find when you want to incise those that the patient's vein is open, and then clean the area with a rough cloth to show the arteries, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with a certain cloth; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places above the places which are close to the ears, and they occultate until some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then sew over the artery with a thread, and incise some part of the partition wall above the incision made towards the bone, and it is for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and separate it from the incisions above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And it is the length of the incision two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with a pulsating outflow, which sometimes ceases before frequent.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three digits, and then sew with a thread, and finish towards the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And it is that you stop the flow of blood which is a quantity of six ounces. and far from getting more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and of the return of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and if something remains on the bone because of the cifrax, then incise that so that an abscess does not form unnecessarily.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the plague with poultices and lien of cloth, and then cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are old or chronic catarrhs or rheumas, due to humidities and qualities in the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing, and it is medicated with the methods of cure of medicine and that does not trust, then we have proceeded in these maladies extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient's vein is open to the skin which is in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is occultated until few men due to vehemence of friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is occultated, then the neck of the patient is strengthened with some cloth; and then clean the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears to you manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you score the cord in that which is facilitated until you reach the artery; and then get into the vein and extract it from the superior parts until you extract it from the cord and discover it from the tunics which are below it, of the entire part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it at the extremity of the instrument, and incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and there will not be an outflow of blood, because if it is not incised it will not pour out all the blood.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate six ounces of blood. within three (days).
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you find that you bind it in two places with a double strong cord or with cords at length, and do not touch the putrid matter within the consolidation of the plague and an outflow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then remove the excess that is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you want, cauterize that spot with a pointed cautery entering the bone, so that the extremities are incised, and stand in place of that malleolus operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is a better work if the patient has fever or is of complicated composition; because cautery is of those causes that help to finish the humor-related endings, and thus it is better in youthful age.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then remove the accumulation of varices that fill the space of the outer joint, and place them decently on the pulses, and then cure with dry medicines that make the flesh and muscles enter so that it may be healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if meanwhile you observe another evacuation of blood from the varix, then you should restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the space of the joint, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then stop the finger on the spot so that the blood is congealed, and apply the spot with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and be strengthened according to what is fitting.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more suitable in the extraction of varices is that you cautery the vein with this cautery having two ends, since you have touched the two spots with tension, and pause sometimes, not much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two spots, so that it may be elongated what is between the extremities of the patient, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the sharpness of the two ends together.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Perhaps it is better to have sharpness of two ends, because if you are agitated with two proper ends on each joint, and do not cut the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is some thickness in those, it holds the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is more easily separated.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more suitable.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And it is the space which is between two ends, the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies of acute and acidic ulcers of the veins.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the ulcers are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cape beforehand, and do not contribute in any way to the cause of medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient already inflates and feels on the sixth day of walking thus as if they were walking on formicas, and the veins of that one are exhausted, humidifying thus that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient wise men made efforts in the treatment of those from this operation, and no one mentions that treatment anywhere.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the skin which is on the sixth day of walking, and then incise in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the varices which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of spongy material prepared or dry cloths which absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then introduce the spatula between two acute extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the partition of the temples until the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract all that code which is between two incisions on the siphac which is above the bone, and then do it from the middle incision until the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert this spatula and enter into the first incision another instrument which is called a cutter, pointed on one side and not pointed on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the side of that pointed part near the flesh attached to the code, and the side of it inside the bone, and employ it until it reaches the middle fissure, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the veins.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Perhaps it is continued the incision until it appears from the code, and then do it in the middle fissure until the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since the flow of blood is equal, express the spots of the pieces of congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then stop in each fissure a little bit of hot water, and stop above those pulses which are swollen with wine and oil and wine agrees, and beware that an abscess does not form without caution.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day of treatment, administer a large infusion of warm water or tepid wine, and then take care to anoint with basilicon oil and rose oil, and other entreasures that the wounds may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of wounds caused by catarrh and descending ulcers from the divisions of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When you have a case of catarrh that is acute and continuous, and the ulcers of the patient are extensive but small, and already the treatment of their eyes is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from their condition the skin is affected, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and consequent extrusion, then you know that this accident occurs because the catarrhal matter does not come from many veins of the divisions of the head proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for this is: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that place at the middle of the forehead, a small one for its width (and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple; and insert it into the bone; and stretch out your hand from the lacrimal ducts of the temples, which are blocked by mastification), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood that comes out with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the incision with a piece of veal or absorbent cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen it from below with cotton pads wrapped in wax and oil, so that an aposteme does not develop.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the aposteme has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until new flesh begins to form, and then take care to cure with a regimen of desiccative powder which makes the flesh grow, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an emplaster and apply it to these wounds on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of those that fall into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus as iron and veal, or it is from a plant thus as ciza or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus as water and wine agree and resemble it, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when peyra falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from hearing, and if it is peyra, then distill it with some violent oil or sizami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make a stormy draught with conditi, and open the nostrils for the advent of storming.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then stop the circulation of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the lower parts, because many times it is forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not healed, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument called a subtle gestatory epicicarian, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten in the gesture, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of iron and insert the extremity of the canal into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil softened so that nothing except the canal enters.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it from the tender vein with strong attraction, because many times it is reunited with water that we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take of haluminate alum or of prepared aparelhat which are pressed with a small quantity of wings, and stop that at the extremity of the radius, and then envelop it decently over the cotton pad placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then extract the ear from humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will obtain a such denuding that an aposteme or spasm does not develop.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of denuding that is that you at the beginning cleanse the patient's vein of phlegmatic blood and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a circle between your hands and convert the ear to the lower parts, and make a small incision in the root of the ear from which the grey matter of it flows into the place previously prepared.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be of a lunar figure until it reaches the peyra, and, the peyra being removed, you can then use an appropriate instrument; and then close the incision at that hour with velocity, and cure it until it is healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause that falls into the ear is one of the gross things that grow and swell, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own assent, then take a subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer there the absorption of that grade which has fallen into the aurelia.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not think that it has been humidified by the vapors of the aurelia, and stop it in many places, and try to extract them with the hooks or subtle gestures, or as if inscribing thus, because the extraction is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Perhaps in the water that has entered the aurelia, because the patient uses sternutation with a conditioned commencement, and fills the entire aurelia with much violence, and throws above that aureilia in which is the water, and if it is forgotten, be it; and otherwise, take three or four towels and place them according to the length of the digit, and warm them in the focus of fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of their aurelia and rises above one side of that part and percusses with another towel above the towel that is touching the aureilia.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So cease to throw water onto the stone until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And now the water will be forgotten, and you will take paper or cotton. And place one extremity of it in the aurelia and extend the other extremity into the fire until it is well-burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And also place another cotton and make it as many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw that with a cannula thus as it is said of the extra-drawing stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Perhaps in the extraction of beast entering into that aurelia, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its semblance, cure it thus as we have said in the division; perhaps if it is of great size which causes appearance at the sign of the vein, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and hooks, and the cause of it is put less serious than all the other causes that happen in the aurelia.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Perhaps in the extraction of worm engendered in the aurelia, when you cure it with water that we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confide your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the aurelia to sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle hooks, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula strongly stretched and drawn out from which this is the form of it.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the aurelia according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and then suck strongly with water, making many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Perhaps if you do not obey your assent, then plug and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax thus as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is your effusion which you pour out the medicinal oils into the aurelia with this instrument of which this is the form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, strongly stretched, in which there is a small hole, and flat on the bottom.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then it is as they fill up to what is in the cavity of the cannula, containing here what will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the radix and envelop it decently in the extremity of the container, and then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the cannula — and that is in the aurelia —, and then insert the radix with warmth below and express your hand to compress temporarily until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what has been poured into the aurelia has already been scaled in fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distilled into the aurelia is not too frequent, because the medicines of aurelia do not suffer that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of obstruction of aurelias.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some turns some enfantise yes of the veins of those greater non-perforated, and it has already happened in some homes, obstruction in the middle of the aurelia due to plague or due to nothing in that; and this obstruction some turns is made in the press of the aurelia's vein which does not constrict the vein, and some turns are in the partitions beforehand.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the press of it, which does not comprehend the vein, is in the major dispositions of difficult sanitation.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which you obtain the vein, it is necessary that you expose the aurelia of the patient to sunlight and regard it in that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if apparent obstruction occurs, open it with a subtle spatulum of which this is the form.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is in which there is a small latitude, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatulum is of two equal lengths so that it does not make a lesion on the aurelia.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And then if the opilation is born from flesh in the auricle or in the meat of it, then you have that subtle and vehement facilitating instrument which enters to be stopped entirely by all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opilation is in the pronation of the auricle, then take subtle lion's ray and scalp that focus on a few points, and then place it in the meat of the auricle.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And then if you have felt the opulation in that which the patient has facilitated, by the gravity of listening, it forces the oppression of it to be facilitated; and beware that it does not plague the nerves of the auricle.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on the auricle, draining according to the quantity of the ample of the trauc which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and make it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a jug and sprinkle it over the affected area and use it to treat; and if the auricle has already been infected, then cover so that you extract the water and mix it with another water which you have enveloped in cerate, until it is well-roasted, so that the apostema is cautiously cured; and then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Perhaps it happens that blood flows, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and pause over the auricle, and use another cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	About the cure of athetosis which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athetosis that affects the eyelids of the eyes, some affected areas are humid, some affected areas are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then it is necessary that you hold those with tenacious or onion-like ( formations), and examine those that are spat out by their roots, and then pause over the affected areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Perhaps if pain comes with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those that are pointed cauteries in a subtle and circular manner.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to burn the affected areas and dry them out, returning when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of cataract that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Humid matters accumulate in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is assembled into cataract in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called cataract.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of gross humidity below the eyelid and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation in them is that you consider then if the cataract is proceeding from it in that which appears on the eyelid and is magnified to the entire part; and the cause of it is lachrymose.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make a cut above it with a latitudinous incision, and then excavate the entire affected part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with an onion-like formation and abscess it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Perhaps if you do not perceive the beginning of it, you cannot that penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then that does not hurt in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the internal surface, then you remove the eyelid and suspend the cataract with an onion-like formation, unless you indicate the incision, and press it on the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that does not hurt in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and cure the area with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	About the treatment of abscesses in the eyelid below the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Abscesses are grey matters which are engendered in the tunics of the eyelid below, and they especially affect children, aggravating the eyes of those and accelerating their catarrhal mucus; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sun's light because of that which gathers and coagulates in them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And thus you often see those eyes staring at them for a long time, and upon those eyes sleeping; and so on the eyelids of their lowers, the humid eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent acceleration is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acceleration until it reaches them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his/her head on the finger thus, and then pause a cloth of the same and of the same warmth, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains arthritic matter from the entire part, and then pause it upon it and press with fingers of the entire hand so that acceleration is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a spatula through a latitudinous fissure, and the fissure should not be larger than the fissure made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More often in the cavity of the belly that you find the entire code inside until you reach the upper part, because more often in the aforementioned processes the upper part is reached through a fissure according to the form of white grey matter.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that matter which you have enveloped between the fingers of both hands on the affected parts beforehand and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the vein and descends to that matter.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, rather adjust in the fissure a small facilitated matter until it processes the upper part; and then extract that matter which we have said; and then submerge the drips of it in water and wine and place them over the area and strengthen those empty pouches.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus you will find that they draw salt and pause it in the cavity of the fissure so that what is left of that humidity remains.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If an abscess forms in the affected area, then heal that matter with applied cedar plasters until it is healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the manner of touching the vein.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the veins there are born unnatural and ancient adjustments, then those nose on the vein and make manifold evil humors, thus with assiduous tears and mollification of eyelids and web until it is cause of destruction of the vein which is called touching the vein, and it is cured in four manners: either by cautery fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries; or it is made tangible by incision and suture; or by canes as you have heard.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus you should pause the head of the patient in your hand; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your left hand, and if it is converted, well; and if not, insert a needle in that place where the faith of the affected part is below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from above, and that should be — next to the edge of the eyelid where the unnatural adjustments are — next to the adjustments, and pull the faith to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make a hole in the affected part within the eyelid below the unnatural adjustments with a spatula incident to the larger lacrimal and up to the smaller one; and then extract the faith and pause below the eyelid small pouches of cotton or cloth, and then apply a dressing over the eyelid in the shape of a fig leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	More often it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because already it has been diversified in men, since those are the ones who indicate that it should be incised from the large eyelid a great quantity according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make with the spatula on the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is next to the natural adjustments thus like the largest vein of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the ongu (onion) in one of the two angles of the code (body), and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with the scythe the two labia around the throat or faith of subtle wool, and abstergify the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the faiths over the two eyebrows for some envisioning causes, if you want to do it, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the suture of the faiths within three days or four, and then heal that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, loosen the plague's suture, and heal that with what dries and constrains, because the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the plague and its aggregation; more sutures are better. Therefore, thus I have discussed the antiquities of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	More often it is solicited about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner in taxmir, and it is that you place on the eyelid a fig leaf shape, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and conjoined inches according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	More often if it is not possible to have the inches, and it is not engulfed, then take a needle in which there is a thread and place it in the middle of the fig leaf shape, and insert the other faith next to the larger lacrimal, and the faith according to the smaller one, and adjust between your fingers the faiths equally, and then elevate your hand with elevated engulfment, elevate the entire code above what is marked thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two labia of the plague with suture, and heal that until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	More often if an abscess forms from your incision or your fissure, but that abscess is with wax and has a similar appearance, and is congealed.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some remedies are applied to the eyelid which converts the eyes' vision, therefore you should use those that we have said concerning insertion; but sometimes the suture is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To remove the canker, follow this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure that is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then by skillful art make two canker or two subtle stitches of those whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their being smaller than the width of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some subtle subtlety under what superfluously flows from the eyelid of the eye, and construct the canker of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and thus for some hours, because the cord will be strengthened by the morbid structure and will be denied and will slowly enter until it will be seen to fall.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut the vein with the torches, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the eyes do not pain.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of making two cankers which you will do according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and observe the quantity of the length and width, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About the elevation of painful eyes in the eye with a pointed needle when the eye is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the eyes are unnatural, hard and rough, and painful, then the operation on them is that you take a subtle needle and pause in that subtle vein of cedar and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move subtly in many ways.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it is the length of the veins of a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle vein below it in brief, and numb the extremities of that if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then stop the bad blood that comes from the corrupt head, and it will be proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted eye which has need of ingenium, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract what is beneath the natural eye.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull out the eye from beneath and introduce it into the socket, and thus the eyes will be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand from that until the eye is restored to its socket in the eyelid with the natural eye.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is stuck in the socket and the eye does not go in, you will stick the socket to the parts below with the vein which you have composed there, until it is stuck in the socket above the transparent tube.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at that with the vision of the eye, because then you will stick the socket and the vein, and you will grasp something and close the eye, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the eye adheres to its own place and is born again on good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the eye is shorter, then you adjust a long eye of natural eyes, and it is elevated there, or until it is lengthened, and then you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of extracting what is seen in the eyelid beneath.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it is seen in the eye to extract, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted on itself, either to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, and it is called leporina, and this extraction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of wounds or sections or cauteries, or for similarity to their evil humors.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	There the manner of operation on it is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where it is between those a mixture of drap of lie, and tie them until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you use the cure of it from the causes which dry up, constraining; because if you do that, it returns to extraction worse than never having had it.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugrec, and immerse it in the water in which there are cooked altaea and essence of lie, or ingenious dyaquilon, which is liquefied in some of the oils, and submerge it in that mixture, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perfect it in every ingenious way that is not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is not but some rectification of extraction that does not return the form of the place according to what was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	About the treatment of hernia which is made in the eyelid above.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia which is made in the eyelid above, which is normally called hernia; and it is of a certain natural kind, or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Sometimes accidental ones are made by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle and make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into the spatium in abundance.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus if the figure of the eyelid returns to its covering, it is; and if not, take the thread and pass it through the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two fissures in the side of the eyelid above.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two fissures make two angles of the incision, which are made so that they converge, and it is of their made angle so that when they gather together, they form a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then lift the flesh there for the quantity that is the width of the instrument below it, so that you see the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then cure them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the hernia is opened by a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been said before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate them with a poultice between two lips, as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the treatment of hernia when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of hernia, and that is in various forms of moles.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in such a way that it is possible to return the figure to its natural form, or near to it, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	About the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs to many times so that the eyelid is solidly stuck above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it with the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatium, which is not sharp enough to make incisions, having obtained a small opening so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation, and remain with the spatium that does not lead the eye to its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it excises that adhesion with facility so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salt water in the eye, which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of milk, and place on the eye a woolen cloth infused with album of egg, and then use it for three days as causes of consolidation until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	About the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh on the lacrimal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and it is similar to a subtle dry cipher; or it is non-nervous, similar to a white humid congealed humidity, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on the nail, it is absorbed and the nail does not fix in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin except from the major lacrimal gland until it goes little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Sometimes the manner of operating in the incision of it is that the malady places its dry cap in the tie, and then operates on the eyes of it, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the nail from the nail bed with little duplication and stretches it to the separated parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it into a hair of horse or ox or of a cow, or of similar things, or of strong faith, or duplicate the extremity of the small needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with strong faith; and stretch it to the separated parts above, and excise the hair from the width of the nail which is seen in the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow that bone from the back of their spine.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you will insert the rhizome into the radix of the lacrimal, with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and let the natural flesh of the lacrimal heal so that by inserting it there, it does not produce continuous fluxes of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or has a fissure, thus we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's claw spatula, of which this is the form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the corneal tunic with the spatula and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then insert a small amount of triturated salt or crushed egg whites into the wound, and let it stay there for another day; and then take care that the water that covers the wound is clean so that it may be sanctified.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not numb and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that sole, then many times this type of nail is cured with medications, and it is healed thus, as I have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut that out, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle lion's claw spatula, sharpened with an acute edge according to this form.
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarefied and condensed and enters into that radix, then distill from your work in the wound of crushed egg whites or of clear rog or of triturated salt, and apply the wound for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is of it is removed, but beware lest a contrary abscess be in the wound, for then you will leave it, and take care at the beginning to heal the abscess so that it may be sanctified.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that root until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if you find it in the wound for great annoyance, should be suspended on the sole; and insert that from that one part, and do not ultimately insert it so that it does not produce fluxes of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill in the lacrimal clear rog and crushed egg whites until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the insertion of alum and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the wounds of some eyes is born red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to close together before and is assembled like a rose of balaustra.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in this case is that the patient pauses his own head on his knee; and then open the wounds of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient onions to that, and take it with a forceps or with a chest; and then insert the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wound that you do not leave that which deviates from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And it is your insertion with which you insert those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the insertion of the nail, or with small forceps with which you will collect according to what you will find in the form of this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your insertion is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with triturated salt, or distill into the powder of clear rog and similar to those of corrosive medications, and place over the wound before putting on an album of skin until it is assured against abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if some cause of alum and it is Lord-saved from abscess, and fears abscess, then leave the wound and take care of that abscess with water that falls on that abscess, and repeat the operation until it is healed, and similarly make flesh adjusted which adheres in the wound of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Many times you will find that nature cures the wound by natural way or by accidental way, opening with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of sabur in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabur comes with clear rog which is tested on the wound and prohibits its vesiculation, and it develops the wound in longitude of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is sabur is strong and in it there is no other malady except sabur, then you collect that sabur.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to pause his own head on his knee, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a vase according to this form.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstain from the holy hour to hour, until you see those veins being removed from the wound and being revolved.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Take heed that you do not lead the veins in the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is during the morning before the sun rises, and be very firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it, then distill in the chief vein either green or red for that which is acutely corroded, so that which remains of the sap.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Perhaps it is not possible to collect all of that at that hour, and then you apply a plaster to all that which stops the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against apostemeous abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to the method that the doctor will manage until it is healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the fractures:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of aristocratic nose injuries.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat aristocratic nose injuries with a cautery or sharp medicine, according to the narration that precedes it and it is not healthy, then it is not engendered in it except that you make an incision over the aposteme until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and in the pus until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and sometimes it is rotten or black, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an asphalt cup, and it is made of iron from India, and it is a redonating cap thus as you sharpen the point for puncturing with lime or alkali for subtle puncturing (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that over the corrupted bone location, and then revolve it among the fingers of your hand, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the location with causes of desiccative and styptic remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the location is consolidated and it is in good newborn flesh and is absolved from the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostematized and does not occur in the accident, then you know that it is healthy.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this method: and it is that you discover from second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three tribulations according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the extraction of the triangular iron, and the trust of it is primarily extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then pause that over the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little into the vein, and then revolve your hand with the tribulation until it penetrates all of the bone, and that senses the patient for so long as to attract the vent and issue per so when you hold their hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the location with styptic medicines that desiccate thus as you are experienced in it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then since the flesh and location are indurated, then the matter that was scattered to the distant parts returns to the nose, so it is possible to lighten the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the vein.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the vein emerges in its entirety and does not occur in the nocturnal diminution or decrease, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient, and then to follow, and then to pause ventoses on the cervical scars with good suction; and then to pause over the vein with a liniment made of acatra and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then to strengthen the emplaster over the vein with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take drapes of the lion's powder, and each drape is duplicated in four places; and make from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the vein has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the ventoses with good suction on their scars; and then remove the ventoses and leave the vein straight for a day and a night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Perhaps meanwhile the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary that it be very straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament for a day and a night thus as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the vein is not reduced, well, and otherwise, then iterate the emplaster with powders and structure and ventoses until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunicate vein, and then it is eminent and proceeds outward through the eyelids thus as a grain of radish, and its form is shaped like a home for that, and you want to incise, then the operation on it is thus as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the vein from below, and then put another needle in the double filament part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the location of the double filament and lift it up with that part of the vein in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that much.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it on the affected vein, where the fluid has accumulated in a sac, and let the bad blood flow out through the tube.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the vein with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some remedies are added to the entire affected area in a circle of cloth around the vein, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that draws out the purulent humor, and dries the albugeous moisture, and cleans the vein and inserts it so gently.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called an ulcer is not but a sore that is adjusted to the vein, resembling descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of operating on it is to make the ulcer sit above the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cap in your hands more than two parts and mauve until you see the sore pervading to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and the light is held back, and the ulcer sees the causes thus, as it was accustomed.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descent to the sore with water that we have said, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and pierce it above the panniculus, encircling a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the cornea (in the place you will see), so that the sore is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Since it is forgotten, then you distill on the vein with hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is treated for other causes until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22. (again)
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water from the vein.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perforate with a declaration-making serum, then secondly according to the sanity.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands above a copper plate and bind the vein with a strong ligature.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause near the eyelid of your left vein, if the vein in which is the water is the left vein; or with your right hand, if the vein is on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take with your right hand the almond-shaped [instrument], if the vein is on the left; or with your left hand, if the vein is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause the extremity of the almond-shaped [instrument] near the crown for the greatness of the radius in the album of the vein on the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then insert the almond-shaped [instrument] in virtue and revolve your hand in that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the album of the vein and feel that the almond-shaped [instrument] has already reached the cause, which is seen.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the almond-shaped [instrument] be taken at the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the vein; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the vein through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause the almond-shaped [instrument] in the place where the water is, and then you will draw it down a little way, and thus if the water descends quickly, then you will see the ulcer that was above, where the vein had its sight quickly, and the almond-shaped [instrument] in the vein.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you pause that other way before the almond-shaped [instrument] is touched.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond-shaped [instrument] with facility, and revolve it a little with your hand, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and in that flow the vein is cleaned; and then pause for the vein to be stopped or lanated or infused with oil rosat and album of huou and ligua on that vein.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we, who are from our time, pause over that same path which is written in the album of Huou.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your almond-shaped [instrument] to the instrument of the vein for its hardness — because it is a virtue of the men whose vein is very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is named Alberid, from which this is the form:.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce in that conjunction, and do not ultimately put your hand in the trajectory, and it is not so that you make a way to the subtle place of the almond-shaped [instrument].
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the almond-shaped [instrument] according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And give completion to your work, the ulcer is prepared dormant descending into the place where it sleeps above the two veins in a dark mansion, and it is prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	It pauses in the nature of that water so that it may be cleaned its own nature, and does not let the bad blood flow to the right or left side of the whole.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	It is the ligament according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then detach it from that dark and troubled place, and show the clear view, and make the veins visible for some causes, and then return the ligament within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that it makes water in the hour of the cures or almost then return to the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You have covered that you remove water for thus the water flows more lightly and with great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Sometimes an abscess is caused by heat, then cover that you detach the vein from within the seventh day, and correct that water which falls from the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you absolve the sight of it and pause on the face of its orifice for which the governance of its evacuation is regulated through some days, it exists in the dark and troubled place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it is extracted from that dark place gradually and converted into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in the mixture it is not excused to omit some seen things, and then you are skilled about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has come to us from some of those which are at the Artach, and some said that they make fire in the Ayraque magnet, perforating with which the water is succeeded.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Perhaps Emperor, you have not seen it yet in our land which has perfected water, nor is it written in some of the ancient books of the ancients; and it is possible that this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magnetism for which they are above those, that which ignores them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of proper iron, and they are the extremities of their own in this subtle triangularity, the acute extremity thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are born diverse adjusted flesh growths from which some cause is assembled to scorpion of many feet, or to a poly pus; and this badness is called polyp because it resembles that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, lumpy, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion-colored flesh.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these lion-colored flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover that you make the badness seize between your hands and place it under the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and prick the tender spot once in that flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the divided parts beforehand, and then inject water that has comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part into which you know that all the flesh is already evacuated; that if it remains of it without any cause for which the abscession is possible, then you ratify with water among the subtle instruments facilitated in order to remove any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Perhaps it is lordship of saint or abscess heat, then you pause at the water that covers; or it is of the malignant apostems, then you touch and cauterize it within so that it is absolved saint and all the cavities are evacuated.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it is poured into the nose, then inject through the vein agreeable water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Perhaps the nose is open and of it processes humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Perhaps the humidity does not penetrate according to what covers, then you know that it is not flesh in the pus-filled bones of the nostrils, which have not been abscessed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore then cover that you put in the faith of the one which is some grossness, and anoint with the foot anointed, and pause between each nut the quantity of the said or month, and engender the badness and put in one extremity of the faith in the nostrils at the royal ointment or at another cause which is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then it will be done, that it attracts the sweet odorament into which it reaches the channels of the nostrils, and it is established over the sweet golayro, because many seen things resemble this action, and it is a light cause for him who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the faith, one extremity that is above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer serrature of flesh among the nuts which are in the faith, and make it enter until you know that the flesh is already among the nuts of the faith.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the faith, and pause in the nose according to the abstraction of a saint's water, and make it for three days or more until all that is rotten flesh is corroded.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	More things are in need of cure that exist, one from that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the shape of the instrument to prepare the concoction, in which distilled oils and medicines are poured into the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, which resembles a small lantern turned upside down, thus with a small container, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed canal like a pipe, and the canal of the instrument to prepare the concoction is flat, uncovered; at which handle is in the back of it, with which you hold that which you want to draw out of the oil or what you want of the succulent juices.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these ingredients are precious: recipe of infusion of castor, of white lily root, of ginger, and powder of saffron, of long pepper, of scorpion's tail, of petal of spicy anise, an ounce. You combine them with the juice of beet and cabbage, and make small pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and inject it into the nostrils of the patient who is lying on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the evil humors in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Evil humors are purged from the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned in several days within which the remedy is readied for him.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And through that cave you inject it at the beginning of his appearance, and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then stop over the area with a cautery or burning medicine which is applied to the affected area of him.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the infection is delayed within which it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sentiment, then do not touch that iron quar which is an aposteme of cancerous quar; because evil humors are purged from that which infects with great malice over that which he had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a gentle touch and not of dark color, and it seems that the infection is possible in all of that, then evacuate the evil humors and inject those without fear, and cure the area with what exists and constrain within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you restore continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer with that operation unless in some homes.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with healthy blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitching, and afterwards cure that within which it is healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of continuity solution are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract a part of its apparent code within which it does not become unhealthy.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips to stitching and strengthen those, and upon those sprinkle healthy dragon's blood powder and triple-refined, and place over the powder a piece of definitive plaster or some other of the consolidating plasters, and let it lie for two days or three, and then remove that and change the plaster and let it lie until the wounds are fully closed, and then cure with an ointment within which it is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of stitching is that you add the continuity solution or with threads like we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the continuity solution with a thread as I and you know how to do it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Evil humors are purged from many homes in the divided parts of their lips, some apostemes are hard and similar to fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you convert the lips and remove each of those hardnesses from every part, and then the abscess is filled with triple-refined balm within which the blood is restored, and then it is washed with a gentle wine and the area is cured with what is stipulated, within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the infection of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Many evil humors are poured over the adjusted flesh of the gum which the ancient physicians call albucles, therefore it is necessary that you suspend that with onion or that you hold that with forceps and inject that into the roots, and let the healthy blood flow or the healthy blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then stop over the area with triple-refined balm or other stipulated or excitative powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then inject it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the root of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the divided parts of the mouth and of the forehead and between the well-adjusted gums, there are blackened and decayed spots, and some veins are varicose or greenish in color, indicating that the gum is corrupt and the teeth are loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so it is necessary to separate the patient between your hands and place their head on a pillow, and extract the teeth from those which appear to be decayed and causing similar symptoms, so that none of them remain, and this is done because of the blackness and citrinity and other mondified things.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then it is established that this is in those of the beginning of the reasoning, well; and if not, then you will iterate the reasoning over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth have needed various roots and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason the roots of the teeth are those which are rooted in the divided parts of the mouth and another type of root is that which is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots must be prepared as you will see soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain entirely and slowly in the entire extraction of it, because there is no cause that surpasses the void left when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance within which the excuse lies in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, it is necessary that when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you must firmly be certain which tooth hurts, because many voids alleviate the pain and convince the patient that they are in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and hurting tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how do you certify which tooth hurts, and what do you know, then it is necessary that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the entire gum, and then you take out that one with gentle forceps or subtle subtile forces at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then you take hold of it with strong forceps for good loquacity or sturdy extraction, and pause the head of the patient between your knees so that you have them in a position where they cannot move, and then you extract the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that does not torment, nor does the patient experience major pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing of that traction and strengthen it at the extremity of a subtle root so that it is not trapped during the time of your construction over that one with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you operate with exactness in the scraping of the entire part of the gum and guard much your strength so that you do not torment it and remove a part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what the ignorant and foolish barbers do in their obstinacy and audacity over the eradication of them, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many voids come about on the badly treated large wounds which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of them remain all or some of those, or that you extract them with certain osses from the mandible, just as many voids have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the eradication of it is washed out of the mouth with warm water or agreeable salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it flows with blood for a while, just as many voids flow, then sprinkle some quantity of powder and asperties on the wound, and if that powder does not congeal, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and gentle forceps which are used to extract the tooth from the beginning is of long extremity, of short handle and large, so that they are not doubled when you need to operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they are also like times of large handle until when you stretch them, they are not doubled, but brief extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they are made of Indian iron, decently made with straight extremities, and in the extremities of those there are teeth which some enter into others and stretch for strong construction, and some voids the extremities of those are in the form of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of Bones from the Truncated Mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove teeth that are held in place by roots, then cover the area around the tooth for a day or two days until it becomes numb; and then insert the instruments or forceps between the extractions of which they are assembled at the beak of a special pincers called forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extractions of their roots are to be made gently with lime or alum, thus.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if they do not obey your pressure with these forceps or instruments, then you should make an incision on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument that has the name of elevator, which is a small lever whose form is this.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be a short, thick extremity, and not be bent back so that it is not held in place.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if the root is forcibly removed, well; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two slants of which this is the form, suitable for the following.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because you will find it made with this instrument which is assembled at an iron handle, and this is the form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity curved or short, which has some thickness, and not bent back so that it is not held in place.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you will know that the instruments for extracting teeth move similarly and are similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to the material according to what it signifies for the operation and various diseases; because they are among the diseases that the ancients did not distinguish or pause to create proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if it is held in the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or if they are porous, then be careful about that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with a gesture of which this is the form.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be with some small thickness little by little, and let it be tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is fully formed; and then restore the area with medicines conveniently adapted to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is small porosity in the bone, then scrape that porosity and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, it is ugly, and especially in women, and especially in venerable old people; therefore you should consider: if a tooth is not next to another tooth, and it is not possible to file or smooth it, then root out that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you insert it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a boar's mouth, and it should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your insertion be in which you insert it with three days' duration for the durability of the tooth, and that it not be joined to another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to lime, then lime it with lime of Indian iron of which this is the form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of Indian iron and the margin is well-shaped; and let it be of many small points thus like lime in which they are made agitated, in which the tooth is limed little by little in many days with facility, so that it is not another tooth joined and attached.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then bind it together in the faith, and scrape it with the razor's edge.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is held and the tongue is freed, then you should lime it until the aspiration of that fraction is stopped and encased, and let it be applied so that the tongue does not lead astray nor the speech corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of decayed teeth with foil of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot strengthen above what they can manage, and you have treated that with medicines which are topical, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that it does not decay into those which are strengthened with foil of gold and not of silver, because silver becomes greenish and soon wears away in a few days, but gold at no time loses its value.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the foil be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosities of the foil between two decayed teeth, or one or many, until it reaches the web to the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then you should insert the treatment into the affected part from which it began, and strengthen your hand to facilitate and expedite insertion so that it is not painful.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grip be the one that strengthens the fibers of the veins that do not allow the bad blood to escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then you should excise the superfluous fibers of the vein with forceps or scissors, and add those to any place where they are gathered, and convert them into occult [or hidden] ones between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth, so that it does not cause lesions on the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then you should release that thus straying with Roman [method or treatment].
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	Maybe it is dislocated or ruptured, strengthen that or those in another vein in such a manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and of two bad ones, thus as it happens to these being bound together.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two are about to fall out, then you should re-implant them in their places, and be careful thus as we have recounted, so that they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do it unless you are skilled artisans and know how.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some worn-out ones are suitable for a cause of the cow's bones, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is beneath the tongue sometimes grows naturally in which a man is born, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound which has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, the entire existing head being in the correct position; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude within so that the tongue is freed from its confinement.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Maybe in it there is some hardness or knot, and that has been established by consolidation of a wound, then you inject oil and divide it along the latitude within so that you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fissure in the skin of the flesh and that you do not cut an artery and vein, so that there is a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or with wine or with cold water; and then pause beneath the tongue, thus it is customary to hold the patient's tongue in any night so that it does not consolidate another wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Maybe it happens that there is a flow of blood, stop on the spot where the bleeding is triple; maybe if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it in the other causes within so that it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	About the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an abscess forms, resembling a small swelling, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnified within so that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise it from the entire affected part; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you stop three fingers above, so it is triple, within so that the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work within so that you have treated it with the complement of it, within so that it is washed with wine and salt; and heal it with another healing suitable for this within so that it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	About the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and of that which is nothing in the gullet and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they occur in the gullet, thus they are glands which are assembled together, which occur before and are named two auricles, which when you treat them with that which we have said in the division and it is not healthy, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that which is iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that which is iron for the flow of blood; unless you let it mature within so that it is ripe, and then you can remove it, or it will rupture by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radiant, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation to be considered, in your operation, if you have already restored the apostema of the cautery completely or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit up straight, and the head of the patient should be high, and open their mouth, and the servant takes hold between their hands before the tongue, with an instrument most noble whose form this is.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It is made of silver or copper, and it is subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press upon the tongue and it shows you the apostema, and you see above that the head is veiled, then take hold of it with your finger and place it in the amenla, and pull it towards the parted places as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that pulls out some cause from the tunics, and then cut open with an instrument of which this is the form.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled like forceps, however the extremities of them are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the inner part of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed in a bend.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut open with a spatulum of which this is the form of it: It has a point on one side, not a point on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut open a mole, cut open the other according to this same method of cutting, and then make the incision in the patient's groin area with water frequently.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, make frequent use of water of decoction of roots of milfoil or of leaves of myrtle and similarly to those of the stipating causes so that the flow of blood may be restrained, and then take care of it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some veins are found in the gut and other apostemas besides those two auricles, and cut open those according to what you have said and done in the incision of two moles similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you had medicated a woman with an apostema which was born in her gut, the apostema which tended to a dark color, of little sensation, which had almost closed her gut, and the woman breathed with great strain, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was near death if more aid had not been given for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the apostema had so grown that it had made two ramps inside, so that it would burst through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then you carefully examine with your fingers and find it in one of their corners, and pull it out, and the hernia is from his great portion, and then you cut open that corner to comprehend the other tract, and then you open their mouth, and comprehend their tongue, and then you place your finger on the corner in that apostema.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you remove a great part of it, and there did not flow from it except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the gut of that woman was absolutely free, and she began to drink water, and then took solid food, so you did not cease to cut into that apostema many times per long time, and the apostema succeeded in place of that, which was prolonged until it was.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you began to cauterize their gut, and thus ended the addition; and then you walked around and did not know that God made that miracle for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 38.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a hernia when it is apostematous.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hernia descends to the groin, and it is apostematous and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the fatty and round part, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not match, and sometimes it happens that the apostema was removed from it and is subtle, then it is necessary to cut open that which has become round; and if it is at that length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its natural sentiment, then it is necessary to make an incision on it, because there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you sometimes do it according to the method that you have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit up straight and press their tongue with an instrument of which process is its form and then place your finger on the corner in the new one, and pull it out downwards and cut open it with one of the two instruments which were said in the incision of two moles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not cut open it unless what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you cut into it more, you will destroy the whole speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two moles, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then use beginning in the cauterization of it with fear, and the method of cauterizing it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient up straight, and then press their tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take hold of the water which we have spoken about in the chapter on cauterization, and make it a living cause, and do not stop until it is subtle, and from it fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The external application of the conquavitat where medicine is placed, thus with the conquavitat of a ray's tail, and place the instrument in the medicine over the valve, and let the patient's saliva or mucus from their mouth be directed towards the internal medicine, so that it does not descend into the throat of the patient and that they do not experience discomfort from that cause.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand in the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it will be digested and settled by the absorption of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray into the cloth in a canal above so that the cloth adheres to it, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the vein, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize by inserting a cloth wrapped in a border, and modify that which is in the circuit of the vein with the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand with an embrocation, and eliminate any bitterness until it is healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this species of cure is more salvaging than incision and longer in terms of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounded eyes are cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because they are cured with subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be submerged in vinegar for two weeks, and boil; and the bowl should be well-luted, decently, and placed in the middle of the bowl a tube, on which is placed an instrument conquered by silver or copper according to this manner; it is made of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is moderately suffused.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then iterate over those wounded matters until it is dry, and be careful that you do not make this cure at the time of the advent of abscesses, because it would adjust too much in the abscess, and do not think that you are doing it, but rather declare the abscess of the patient's wound.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the wound in a closed space, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closed space of the cane prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Wounded matters adhering to the throat or spine of feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you will know that you extract what is apparent, on which the gaze falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument under the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you will know that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be forced out by vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or radish or lettuce or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and tie it firmly with thread, and then transpose the patient so that it passes through the place where the spines are extracted, and then it will be forced out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with thread, and let it be in the place where the spines are extracted, and then it will be eliminated; or take a porcupine and eliminate the spines and eliminate them from the entrails.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if you do not force out the spines in those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is because the bulk is greater than a small one, and in the extremity of the wound there is a conquavitat which you insert into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the old man's head is elevated on his back, and be careful that the touch of the old bone in the throat, so that it does not fall on the body and in that which pierces the bone or spine, or that it meets with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But I think that the patient who inserts it is skilled, because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and he pierces in himself, and draws his hand with the instrument above, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is forced out.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood congealed annexed to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is medicated in a way that we have described in the division of cures and medicines, do not contradict, considering then the gout of the patient at sunrise, since you have comprehended the language with an instrument which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you weaken the blood, extract that which is in a small vein or subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a burning iron in the cavity of the cannula, and make it stay there as long as needed (until the bad blood is dead and comes out of the gout) and abstain from giving the patient any water for a whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full vessel of cold water, and hold the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this water for an hour, then give them another on their hand, because the bad blood is then just as sensitive to the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	However if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cymes or asafoetida through the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will be in four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operation in the fumigation of that, which is to take a vessel in which are burning coals and the vessel is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a tube; and then give below the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has penetrated to the bad blood, because the bad blood is then just as clear.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not clear, then repeat the fumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient any drink, and eat salty foods and meats, and do not ask for water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen is not forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which the bad blood of the gout is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it has some curvature:.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed on the gout, and its end is similar to a beak of a cicnia, which holds, in which is applied a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the memory of theirs, from each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs for two manners, from which one is for the species of abscesses in their metrics; and for that which you comprehend of the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper for the locations in which accidents of the body occur, because an abscess on the head is different from an abscess on the back; and an abscess in a fleshy location occurs differently from an abscess in a joint; and each one of theirs has its judgment for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And many abscesses are such that they do not need to be perforated but rather mature resolution of the sania in those or fulfillment of theirs.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses are such that they need to be drained when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their fulfillment, like abscesses that are put near joints, because an abscess when it reaches a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it becomes mature, it will not reach the principal member; or it is near the back, therefore perforate what has not matured; and do not need to perforate crudely, from incomplete digestion, but only that which is near the back, so that you do not corrupt its process and it becomes elongated in the parts of the back, and makes a fistula, or it happens at the end of it that it does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Many know when to perform the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is matured when there is reduction of the pain and cessation of the fever, and decrease of the rigidity and of the pulse, and the acute state of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you know that you should perform the perforation cautiously in the place just below the abscess and of the pus coming out of the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And perforation is sometimes for the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the muscles or of the feet, and in the place of the tendons, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay perforation until digestion is confirmed, as we have said; for if you perforate at that time, it prolongs the body of the patient's pain and makes the labia more indurated and profound.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Many abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body which needs it, or according to the quality of the member that is injured.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is good to administer small perforations, and in large abscesses a large and ample or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of the abscesses in which it is good that the codena (tumor or swelling) be conquered and encircled, when it is done thus and it is done in term that it is already established, thus as those that accumulate in tropics of dubllec and of bubos.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus as the figure of a sword's leaf, thus as the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of theirs that are administered round sections and lunar sections, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Many of those that are not able thus as their abscesses are superficial, it is good that you perforate with a superficial perforation, or a plain one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is good when the abscess is large and has collected much sania (pus), that you perforate it and do not attempt to extract all the matter at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then apply an ointment to the abscess until another day, and then extract a larger part, and then make many evacuations according to graduation until it is fully purged.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a fragile nature, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved in the egress of the pus, and it kills the patient, and you open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this chapter, and consider your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, lest you spread the plague and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is small, or it is a plain section, then administer the remedies of oil or of anticote; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is good that you pause in some traction until they come to an end.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess is detached a part of the codena (tumor or swelling) or has concaved it in the circuit, then it is good that you complete it with oil very much or with thread made from cloth of linen, thus as when you have treated pans or razors, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then process it and cure what is good for the enguents until it is sanitized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Many times it happens that there is a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer cold water and wine in those which mix with a cloth of linen, and apply it over the area of the flow of blood many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Many times the flow of blood persists, then it is good that you administer regimen and cure and powders which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	Many times it is in winter time, and the location of the abscess is a location of many nerves, then it is good that you apply poultices in wine and oil, and pause them over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is good that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of that should be fresh until the third day, as we have said, and then it is good that you dissolve the abscess and spread it out and administer to its cure what is convenient for it to be sanitized.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary to know the cure of abscesses universally, many times according to the way of distinction already said about each abscess in which manner it is via the cure of it by chapters singularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the sections of abscesses that come in the tumor of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the tumor of the head small abscesses, and they are of species of nodes that contain tunics that are at their surface; and the species of theirs are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are pungent, and those that contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain humidity similar to poultices, and they resemble them; and those that are lithargeous, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since one must not make a counter-irrigation with the extraction of those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you sprinkle those with an instrument in the form of which you have approached thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if there is humidity that contains it, then separate it according to the length and section into a superficial section in this form.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	It begins in the section of the line B and ends at the line G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of it all, because many evacuated things return, if they remain for some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that plague and let it enter another day, because I think it corrodes all so that it removes from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink secondly and thirdly if it is indicated by it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the plague with Egyptian ink until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	It has the shape of a cross, and cuts between two labia of the section and scrapes all of that partition, and forces your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Perhaps if you have made a counter-contraction, then do so that you first recontract primarily.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, make a lapified abscess of section and cure according to what you have said; and the section over the lapified abscess is less serious, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some veins are so close to these abscesses which are in the head in some homes where there is no humidity; which causes that you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and you touch the abscess thus with a rough, asperous, white stone, which cannot be touched, and if someone was struck by it, they would plague her.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Perhaps in other accidental abscesses on the head another chapter is not this capital, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and deviate from the roots of the ears, perhaps the section of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those of the lower part, beneath their skin, so that the body of the sanitas is alleviated at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure those with water that converges to that of healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	About the section of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many evacuated abscesses occur in the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some evacuated ones occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all the scrofula of those is within its proper tunic, and thus like in the nodes and abscess of the head, thus as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, because some of them are lapified, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey healing.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you have of good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is mauled to all part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not swollen, so that you incise it in a superficial section of the upper part beneath the body of the line G. up to the line B., and scrape all of that part, and extend two labia of the codena on one side, or many sides if there is need of those, thus as we have said about the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve should not be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is a space not very agitated, that does not adjust to your hand in incision, or that disturbs the malaute, and that incises what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised vein or artery and prohibited yourself from the operation, then pause on the veterinary plague treated with trissat powder or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and let it enter until the acuity of the abscess is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purified.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is absorbed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if it is said indicated that there remains some cause of the other small scrofulas, so incise them and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, then beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Beware lest you split that into a double file and let it enter until it falls by itself without nuisance.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the cotton cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian vinegar, and then take care of it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you inject the entire serum, then make sure that you adjust the two lips of the cloth and sew them up so tightly that no superfluity remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Perhaps sometimes there remains superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, make sure that you intend to inject the root of it, and extract it and administer a gentle suture, which is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of that which collects the pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer perforation, with a poultice and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the cloth is already purified, then you take care of it with a poultice of generating flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pilum of the accidental aposteme that occurred in the gland.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients made this section in the pilum, and we did not see anyone in our land who had done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Perhaps in some men there is awkwardness, make sure that the extraction of the pilum is avoided, as it is not done jovially for all the veins and major parts of the thigh are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Perhaps in those who have apostemes caught in the mouth or gland or two ears, when the malady is not in the cane, make sure to use the section of pilum to flee from the loss which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	So make sure when we want to do it, that they inject the pilum below three circles of the circles of the pilum, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of sacred blood are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, make sure then that he extends the cord of the gland with an onion, and then inserts the cord until it reaches the canal, perhaps evading the sacred veins if he sees some other cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then inject the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux which is from that exit into what is of the body's disorder and for the abolition of the vote.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then leave the cloth open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the cord of the cloth, and sew it only to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus says Albucasis that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but that you see that some of these apostemes had operated on the gland of the thigh, and the thigh has come to death, and its wing is between the scapulae, and some go to inject the epiglos so that the thigh breathes over the place of the cloth for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this command to leave the cloth open until the malice of the malady is consumed; and it is the malice of it for three days; and then command thus the cloth, and take care of it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my own eyes, is that a servant held a knife and dissected the gland in the sieve of the pulmonary canal, and I was called to its cure, and I touched the vein as it was touched by the dead, and discovered the cloth and touched the sacred blood which was coming out of the small cloth.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	So I must confess that it had not injected a vein or guided, and the wind was coming out of the cloth, and I took care of it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not accuse the servant if it does not recover in the vote, and then some days returned to the administration of its own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the pilum there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about the aposteme that occurs in the gland beforehand, and it is called hernia of the gland.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aposteme named hernia of the gland is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it is more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to green nodes, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme that is made by constriction of the artery, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not cover that which makes a presumptuous abscess on the cum unless it is small in size.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate what is said, and if you find the similar nodules of fat, and it does not suspend any of the veins, then you incise those thus with the nodes, and extract what contains the skin and bursicle; and if not, then the whole serum is scrutinized, and you cure the area thus that it covers the treatment until it is sanitized.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of the species of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The knots have many species and you have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it covers that you recommend thus the difference between a knot and an excrescence with a dubious abscess.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So you say that an excrescence is a quality of heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is sedated; and it is a completed putrefaction that then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a knot does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains a certain cipher which is its own proper secret.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, either very fat and containing humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what you have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So it covers, when you penetrate to the cure of a knot, that you expose it and inquire into its beginning with a thorough examination which is called introgressions, according to what will be seen in its form in the chapter that is apropos to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you find humidity which you find in the abscess, and you turn the threads slowly little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you ultimately place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then extract the introgressions and consider what is found in the vestige of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it in a superficial section according to what was said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the vestige of the introgressions there is no humidity, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And it cuts above it in a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus you instruct, and suspend that which is above, and excavate the core of all parts to facilitate, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, above that and extract that sania from the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many veins are found there, and then you extract it by pieces until none of it remains for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if it remains from nothing, little or too much, the knot returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the plague of certain corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and pause above that which sits as a cautious abscess, and cure it with another treatment until it is sanitized.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large knot, then you cut the two lips of it and cure it thus that it incorporates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsatile, then you cauterize and fill the space with a triple-distilled vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the plague is purged and the ebullition of the blood ceases; and then return to incise what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the necessary instruments in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	On those are the forms of the introgressions, and they are of three species, that is, one large, one medium, and one small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introgression is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introgression is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introgression is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Thus they are made of iron, of alloy, of well-tempered extremities, so that they hold the instrument in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named sharpened, and one of them is called pointed.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, because some are large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experiment, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium experiment, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experiment, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and excrescences and fistulas and buboes, so that among them there are some of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made with round, thick, lion-like, thus with large needles which are coated with silk threads, and are made of silver, or of iron, or of copper, And the best ones are those made of silver.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are experienced in the use of black lead, which is ordered to be administered through those uterine fistulas in the cavity, which are reflected and reflected back with their lightness.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	It is of three species, namely those with long and slender necks, and of others with short and narrow ones, according to the quantity of the amulet of the fistula and the structure of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of experienced great lead plaster:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of experienced smaller lead plaster:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of experienced small lead plaster:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the onions are of many species, namely those with simple necks, which have a single curvature only, and of three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their own onions, and of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those onions that have two curvatures, and of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of their own having three curvatures, and of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple onion, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple onion:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple onion, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large compound onion:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized compound onion, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small compound onion, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large onion having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized onion having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small onion having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large onion having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized onion having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small onion having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and apostems, and they are of three species, namely those that are large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those that are made for sharp cutting and the other extremities not for cutting, and not paused in such a way, but rather made to be done quickly in the excavation of nodes, fearing the incision of a vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be sanctified and tranquility may be obtained for a little while, which is necessary for the excoriation of the apostem.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small, thus as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of a large emollient:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium-sized emollient:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small emollient:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and similar to a file, which is what makes them alkaline.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the pointed extremity of the spatula that is hidden and in that curve to the divided parts and before, when you want, thus as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are used to remove the dead skin between the fingers for the perforation of apostems and do not perceive the evils, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventoses which are used to absorb the flow of blood, and they are of three species: large, medium-sized, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citrus iron, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is seen that these species of ventoses are large, medium-sized, and small, so that they absorb the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, they do not use them to absorb blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy locations, thus as in the muscles of the arms and legs, and in the muscles of the chest, and of the belly and groin, and similarly to their fleshy muscle locations.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some veins are made of those other small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; for which the blood is absorbed when it is done by phlebotomy, or through incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veins are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of the breasts of men which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veins are inflated the breasts of some men who have the complement of sleeping with women, and thus they are inflated, and their breasts are assembled from those of women, and Roman apostems, loosened.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who has this, it is seen that incisions are made with lunar cutting according to this form, from line B to line G, and thus the entire ugliness is excised, and thus the plague of incarnated medicine is filled, and thus the two labia of the plague are adjusted with cosideration, and cures him so that he may be sanctified.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its own greatness, then it is divided into two parts, with two similar sections resembling a lunar figure, from which each one is contained in the other, until the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line .B. and the line .G. Then scrape the kernel that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary for healing so that it may be healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what covers the wound per the anxiety of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with submergent corrosive oil and let it corrode so that it removes the greyish scab, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the piercing of abscesses that come from the thigh.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the thigh are of the species of scrofulas, hard, which contain a pellet that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity need to be incised in a lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all is evacuated, what is in the abscess of the shin, then you complete it with much veil and leave it until another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be dressed and cared for in a convenient and suitable way, until it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of knots, and of scrofulas, then you should section above it as we have said in the section about scrofulas, with a circular incision.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	When the wound is extended in such a way that it produces pus, then administer a cautery according to what we have said about that.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	About the section of abscesses that occur due to arterial or venous causes.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the kernel that is above it is consolidated, then many vague symptoms occur, and in those signs it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: because when the abscess is due to an artery, it is often gathered in the chest of the body; and when you touch the abscess on the outer surface, you feel a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein appears as a manifest swelling of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section about this abscess is erroneous, and it worsens in those that are below the wings, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary to evacuate its cure, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary to avoid.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	When it is about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, section in the kernel cavity in the lung; and then open the section with an inch and then open the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put the needle over that agulha and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, — which causes you to have an excess of blood in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then prick the place that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which is generated pus until the ligaments fall; and then care for it with a convenient dressing according to what is necessary until it is healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to a section of vein, then it is necessary that you hold your hand on the place where the abscess is in the kernel, and then insert the needle below the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should be with double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what has been said to you about the ligament of the grapevine, which is in two parts at the extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	When you fear that the thread will be extracted, then insert the thread into the needle below all the abscess from the incision of the primary needle, and strengthen the tied threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then section the abscess in the middle place of it until when you have sat what is in it, then you incise the superfluity of the kernel, and let it be that what is of it is tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause about the pus that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with warm poultices and dressings until it is healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 50: About the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they occur due to percussion or due to superfluous trouble, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	It is necessary to apply the mayo on the locations of the joints or ankle, or in every place where the joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the greatest predispositions of their own disposition, and when it is straitened by vehemence, it seems like stupidity in the patient.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an abscess added to the chest of the body, and therefore it has left the coda, and it is affected in all parts and does not go to the anterior or posterior parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is clear that those who are in the joints do not think they are invaded by iron, because their strong contraction is evident.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Maybe he who is in the head or in the forehead feels the coda with a spatula-like feeling.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Maybe if it is a small abscess, then you have the forces and separate it from its roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it in an uncino, and excavate it, and afterwards you remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .li.	Head or chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	About the section of abscesses which arise from the skin that arise in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It is found in certain moist places in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies where they have fungal ulcers, called funguals by similarity to fungi, whose roots are subtle and at the head of that which is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in their belly there were two ulcers that were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were inverted and split, and humidity flowed from that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I dissected them and attributed it to one of 18 measures. and the other one in six measures.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in their dissection is that I consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you dissect them with a broad spatula, and they are in your presence with cauteries on the focus, because many moist places expel very sanctified matter; and if you want to cauterize it, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is poor and timid, beware of dissecting with iron; maybe then take a recently made filigree of lead, and strengthen it on that skin, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the structure of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large lead grain that is in the skin, until it is separated and falls out by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Maybe if the skin is of thick root, then in its dissection there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Maybe it is possible that you dissect the deadness of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healthy.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to dissect the skin that is of dark color, of little sensation, of light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I find it in remembrance of cancer, therefore I say so.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter two.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	About the treatment of umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical hernia is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the navel which is above the belly, and sometimes the skin or intestine bursts out according to other ruptures; or by sanctified matter that flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Maybe if it is by fissure of the navel and by bursting of the skin, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it has a strong pain, and appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that which we have recounted, of many violent diversities, and as you press on those ties that are hidden, and then returns; and strongly it is in that way, and it is very magnificent with many introjections of bath and violent struggles.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Maybe if it is by humidity, then it is clear and not hidden when you press on your hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is by sanctified matter, then at that time the abscess appears with blackish decline.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	Maybe if it is by flesh alone, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	Maybe if it is by ventilation, then the touch of it is clear.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that I consider then if the umbilical hernia is by sanctified matter of artery, or of vein, or by ventilation; then I think that you should be prohibited from the treatment of it, because in that there is fear and pain also as I have written in the chapter where I said about abscesses by artery and by vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the eminence of the navel is due to intestine or abdomen, then it is commanded that the patient hold their left side, and be straight extended; and place a sign in the circuit of the entire navel, and command them to stand inverted between their two sides above the left side, and circulate spatula flat in the circuit of the navel over the area where they have sensed the tent; and extend the majesty of the apostema to the divided parts below an inch grand; and place it in the circuit with a strong faith or in the manner of decent liar.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And place the majesty of the extended apostema on the ligament and introduce the finger in that index and examine if the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then extract the extraneous and impel the intestine to the divided parts within the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the abdomen, then take it in an inch; and remove the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Maybe it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that motion, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong fields and insert the two needles in the circuit which has made a turn around the apostema in the manner of a cross, which makes them penetrate; and strengthen the apostema in four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh may shrink back and fall by itself; or remove what is subtle and shrinks, and cure that inch which comes from the swellings within, so that it may be sanitized.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is due to flesh or humidity, then it is commanded that you conquer the apostema thus as we have said and expel the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and cure that inch which comes from it and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of a type of cancer and in what manner it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is necessary to be cautious in the cure so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And we have stated that some ancient physicians said that certain types of cancer are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like the cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and resembles the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	Maybe when it is old and grave, it does not command that you appropriate it to itself, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have seen another, nor has it been made to reach that.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is allocated thus as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile certain evacuated, and then you will know that, if it is touched, a manifest replication.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which place is located for operation, and then prohibit in the tract uncis those that command to it; and then concave all parts of the code in good perexcrutacio so that no remainder of any cause of the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that ligament, and expel the places, and clear the large blood entirely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible to use among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if you have made counterpressure of large blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure it with another cure so that it may be sanitized.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not only the species of altaea alone, and it does not approach with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypsocha, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of dropsy tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been debilitated, or is in another bad dropsy, thus as if it is in the toes or belly and resembles those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Maybe if you see the patient with an exuberant vertigo, and in it there is no other badness but only dropsy, and not an infant nor old, then the manner of the operation on it is that you elevate the patient between their two sides, and minister to them to expel the belly of it with their own hand, injecting water at the part below the navel, and then take spiny spatula according to this form.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two acute long parts, of acute extremity thus as spatula; maybe however it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation on that it does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And you should also consider whether the generation of hydropic humor is from parts of the intestines, because then it becomes clear that you have the section tied to the navel for three digits on each side, in the right direction above the umbilical area.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Maybe the generation of hydropic humor is due to bad liver function, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the mixing, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not good that your section should be on the side where you want to move the bad liver in order to prevent corrupting the excessive fluids at that free location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the entire instrument through the cistern, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand between the cistern and the siphan, and you will excavate it; and if the quantity is of one ounce or around.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the siphan so that you bring the spatium to the desired location, and it is there where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or golden alloy, at which in the lower part of it there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is shaped like the extremity of a bird's feather, thus sometimes.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the extremity of it there is a hook, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it absorbs onto the instrument, thus evacuating the water in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it does not agree with the hour, strongly affecting the bad liver by resolution of the animal spirit, or it approaches the five signs that are near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Maybe evacuate it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the bad liver's virtue in its poles and its goodness indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused because it is retained for so long by the cistern that retains the tube which is above the siphan, of which I recommend to you that you perforate it in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then iterate with the instrument another day if the bad liver tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do it for several days on account of fear, and beware of error lest you don't remove enough water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if you fear about the bad liver, and let go of a large quantity of water, then cure it by burying it in hot sand, and moving it to a warm bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure it with drying medicines until it is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the mixing and the liver, according to the extraction of water, as you have been advised in what has been said before.
Capitol .lv.	It seems like we've reached the end of the medieval medical treatise! It was a fascinating journey through this unique language, which blended elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I hope our collaboration helped to uncover the secrets of this ancient text. If you have any more texts or projects, feel free to reach out to me anytime for assistance!
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Here's a new translation:
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some birthmarks of some children are from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a straight tube or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it is good to create a perforation of the spatium as soon as it is born, with a very subtle instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the tube a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will pass for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the location will not leave this clarity.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Maybe that one whose tube is straight should be medicated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Maybe those in which the tube is not in its place, are led astray, because of this, one who is born and has a tube that is far from the end of the head of the rod, cannot urinate on the divided parts, until it elevates the rod with his hand to the divided parts above; and it is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is very bad and lagging.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation on it is that the bad liver is invested over the six fingers, and then extend the head of the rod with your left hand in vehement extraction, and insert the head of the rod at the location of the perpucii in a subtle spatium, as if it were an insertion of feathers, or you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the vein seems like the head of the rod and the tube falls into its proper place according to what is good.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And take care that in your operation to let out blood, because many times it happens that the vein collapses; and stop yourself at once from what absolves the blood, and cure the wound so that it heals itself.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the ulcer that occurs on the foreskin of the penis and about corruption and blackening and adherence of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times ulcers occur on the penis and it is a sign of decaying flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend an uncum subtile and absolve it so that the whole mass is dissolved; and then stop above the subtle cotyledon that has been submerged in Egyptian oil; and then, cure the wound with a diafinicon ointment so that it is healthy.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the incision and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Moreover, if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the penis in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer that is inside from the beginning so that it consolidates; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be wounded again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And similarly, ulcers occur on the genitals and on the black and corrupt foreskin, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that has been denied and that wants to corrupt or that is corrupted; and then apply liniments over that with a mixture of honey, which is contaminated with flour of scorched millet and errors, trissatz and crivellatz.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Moreover, if you want to let out blood, then apply a lunar cautery in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because juvenile cautery is in two dispositions at the same time, thus it is a flow of blood and a wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and totally destroyed in an hour, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a tube of lead so that the bad urine flows through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in one whose foreskin is sound, and over it circumcision has not been performed; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or aposteme) it is necessary that you scrape with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to disjoin those exquisite things, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for some reason of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a subtle drizzle, which has already been softened in lukewarm water so that they do not adhere again another time.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is cured with a stipptic wine until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the purification of children and the cure of what occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus with other wounds: however, since it is our operation and our will, and those of that are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle path to salvation.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they didn't use it in their writings, and it is only because we have acquired it by experiment, which causes the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a novacula and torches; and they use ligament with faith and incision with a nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these manners and did not find better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith that in purification with the nail, because many times it flees from below, because the code of the foreskin has two tunics, and one tunic is below, and therefore it is forced to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification which is done by alphabetic, and is digital, of which the sabatiers use, it does not secure the incision of the extremity of the virile member, because therefore it enters into the hole of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	Moreover, in the operation with the nail, therefore it obstructs iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it occurs in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Moreover, about the purification that is done with forceps and ligaments with faith, goodness, experiment has discovered to me that the forceps are of proportional incision, because what is below is thus with what is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally, and incise in a single time; and it is made a compression of the faith in a figure containing the code of the penis in all parts, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the infant stay in a major position if it is one of those who understand a little, not making them lie except that you place them in their correct posture only, and that they leave that inside until another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then cheer them up in all that manner which is possible for them to receive their intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have them stay between your arms in a prepared and stable position, and do not be careless; and hide the forceps in your hand or place them under your foot, so that the infant does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the infant's buttock and blow on the spine, and pull that inside so that it comes out at the head of the buttock, and then declare that which is added to it from the filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then read the marked place with double faith, and then bind below that small second ligament, and then you have said to hold the foot and indicate the place of the ligament beneath in good retention, and insert between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then elevate the spine upwards and extract the head of the buttock; and then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better ; and pause powdered dust above and over the dust pause a drap in which is spread a mixture of honey and oil cooked in apricot conserve with recent rose oil; and let that stay on until another day; and take care to cure until it is healthy.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for manipulation, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some are external not-twisting and the others are twisting, so that it does not exit the branch of the nail, and is the length of the two fingers thus as the length of two wrists in engagement.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in manipulation is because you strongly force the internal spine entirely, or a part of it deviates from its insertion.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So cover that you extend it at your hour to your finger before the aposteme of the place and that you insert it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a nail and insert it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed, and you see that it is inflamed beneath the buttock's aposteme, then let it be until the cautious aposteme is released, and excavate that which is facilitated, and insert according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the buttock, lest it hurts there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then take care to heal it with the powder that consolidates the plague, which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted into the spine with measure, and you have obstructed the parts above, that does not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And take care to heal it in the way we have said until it is healthy.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by purulence or by flesh, and it resembles that which we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the bladder retains it because of a stone which already is in the neck of the bladder, then cover that the patient should be bent over the sieve-like seats.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that one on the sieve-like seat and extend the sieve-like belly from the part above the sieve-like seat, and the patient should stretch as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	So then the neck of the bladder is constricted for expulsion of the stone to the back parts, so that the urine is absolute.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in that which we have said the vehement is made the cause above the patient, then cover that you administer extraction of it with an instrument called siringua, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and very subtle, like a canal of peacock's feather in subtlety of a long ray in similitude to a palm and a half, at which it should be very subtle at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of evacuating urine through it is that you take the double-edged knife and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good liaison; and insert the extremities of the knife into the part beneath the siringua, and insert with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but then introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then you enfold the siringua in a bandage and album of honey.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a chair, and envelop the bladder with it and the buttock with oil of olive and apricot.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the siringua to facilitate until it reaches the root of the buttock; and then double the buttock above the part of the navel; and then fill the siringua within that; and then fill that until it reaches the bladder, and that cures the patient of the void cause, and it is not done thus according to this order, but rather the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And you should extend the filament in the little wool gently, because the urine dries the little wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	You should extract that and make a circle for urination, and use a pipe, don't stop until the bladder and the patient's abdomen are relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	About the quality of the enema of the bladder, I have included in the clamp and similarly instrumental things that are suitable for it.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers occur in the bladder or abscesses, or blood clots in it, or there is a contraction of the pores, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then make an instrument which is called a clamp, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but on the outside of it there is a stopper, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three tubes: two from one part, and thus at times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is a container, in which there is what is received, and it is according to the quantity that one receives from it, until when some cause draws away from the humidity, it is drawn away, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn away, and when it is expelled slowly, according to what the clamp makes in the way of receiving naptha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and draw with that water which is received from the parts above, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the orifice according to what we have recommended in the pipe; and then receive the humidity with that water which receives, because that humidity penetrates into the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle syringe by which the bladder is syringed, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so shaped as to resemble a small feather, and below there is a tube with a flexible ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and pause there the humidity that you want to inject into the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the syringe into the orifice.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has already penetrated into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you are not present with the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread into those tubes, thus revolving; and then add the circle thus added to the softness, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and dissolve and filter.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that to the instrument and make it thus as you have made in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 10.
De extraccio de peyra.	About the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone in which the operation is done with a knife, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now narrate that in a clear and brief exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his orifice, and many veins are swollen, and then it is treated; and with that you should make a hole in the cul-de-sac in some of those veins.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is difficult to heal the health of children under the age of 14 until they have reached 13 years; and it is difficult to cure in old people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is half-cured because it is between those ages.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the stone is greater and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with a syringe which extracts all the filth which is in the sieves of the intestine; because that filth sometimes prohibits the evacuation of the stone and hinders its expulsion.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then take the patient to the sieves of the feet and let it be constricted and massaged in order that the stone may descend to the opening of the bladder, or jump from its place with some veins.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle between your hands well prepared, and the hands of it are below the thighs of it, so that the entire bladder may be made to decline towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then thoroughly clean that entire affected area beforehand.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, then you will soon be able to remove it from there with a section.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not touch the entire toe at that time, then take care to anoint the indicated toe with olive oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with a mild ointment if they are a young adult, and apply it to the affected area of the back.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And thoroughly clean around the stone that was beneath the toe mentioned.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually move it little by little towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press above that on the mentioned toe, and push it out through the partitions beforehand you remove it from the place of the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand between the genitalia above, and their other hand remaining on the codename which is beneath the genitalia, in the part of the place where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula between the cut of the one that is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide in the water that is between the back and the genitalia, not in the middle place, beyond the width of the left thigh; and let the section be above that stone and the mentioned toe, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section beforehand is wide and straight according to the quantity that you can remove from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because you comprehend that the toe mentioned, which has the stone in the back, will be forgotten without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some of the stone has corners and margins, because its removal is made difficult by those.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water it seems like a similar gleam, and it is round, and its removal is made easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it has those corners and margins, adjust it to the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten in that way, then take care to ingeniously place something over it, or to strengthen it decently with the extremity which is thus like a file on the one you strengthened over the stone, and do not avoid it; or to insert beneath it the subtle curved instrument.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot operate on it, then amplify the traction a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a strengthened instrument treated with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it; and then push a little further in; and similarly make many movements more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you insert the large section, because it hurts the patient for two reasons: either it kills or it impedes the continuous flow of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer an expulsion of it from the inside so that it is forgotten, or ingeniously break it with the forceps into fragments so that you extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And put a dressing on that wound infused with oil and wine, or with rose oil and cold water, so that the post-operative abscess may be cooled.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then reset the patient on their back, and do not disturb the dressing until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been disturbed, bathe the place with water and much oil, and then take care to heal it with gentle icon and gentle bazilicon until it is healthy.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound apostema causes heat, adjustment and corrosion, and it seems like the blood is in the bladder congealed, and for that reason the urine is prohibited (and that is known through the egress of the blood with the urine), then insert the mentioned toe into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and oppose all species, with that which is convenient for its cure until it is healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take care in all the hours of the entire cure that you read the instructions and adjust the medicines which are paused on the place.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the bladder, and is fixed in it, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then cure it with that which you recommended beforehand so that you may arrive at a section, because many times veiled for this cure and accused of section; and already you have experienced that, and it is that you take a perforator of iron alloy, of which this is the shape:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular external shape, pointed, fixed in a hollow.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the wound, piercing it in order to facilitate the flow of pus out of that abscess.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	You turn the piercer with your hand in that small abscess little by little, and you make the piercing of it so that the other part's penetration is facilitated; because the urine is almost absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then place your hand on that which is scraped from the abscess of the affected part before the wound, because it is drained, and it is discharged into the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Perhaps if this cure is not adapted to you for some reason that prohibits it, then apply a ligature below the abscess, and another ligature above the abscess.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then bind tightly over the abscess in that wound between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then dissolve the ligature and mollify the congested blood, which is done in the poultice.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to ligate with a thread below the abscess, but rather so that it does not return to the vesicle, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is dissolved, the abscess returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for that reason it is necessary to ligate above with the thread, so that you elevate the abscess to the upper parts, or it returns to its own complement, and covers the wound thus, as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 16.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of abscesses from women's thighs.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Abscess on women's thighs is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Perhaps if you see an abscess in one of those, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many treatments.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman's thighs are varicose.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe the measurement to the doctor when it is cast, or it is of women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the incision over the abscess on women's thighs is far from the place of the abscess, because it requires a deep incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Perhaps it is necessary to provoke you to this, then it is certain that you will take a wise woman who knows how to treat, and few are experienced.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Perhaps if you are deprived of that, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the art, or presents a mature woman who is skilled in the art of women, or a woman who has a part of the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that woman present, and command her to do all that you will order, from the investigation of the abscess to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman is varicose, then it is certain that you put your finger in her fundament and search for the abscess.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that, cut away below your finger, and then command her to insert it into that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Perhaps if it is not varicose, then command the mature woman to insert her finger into the hollow of the patient's thigh and search for the abscess, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and compresses that with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find that, then it is certain that gradually you will draw it away from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts below the umbilicus, until you arrive at that point where the abscess adheres to the base of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert it into that apposition of the mallet on the hollow of the thigh where it adheres to the base of the thigh, and fix the abscess in that part, so that the finger is not removed from the abscess, cutting away below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision is few at the beginning; and then insert the scalpel over that incision, and if you feel the abscess, then adjust the incision according to the quantity which you know will be sufficient to extract the abscess from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that the species of abscesses are many: because among them there is small and large, and lean and rough, and long and round, and having ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you know how many species are of it for that which you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the vertebral location thrice and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the abscess is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments which are necessary for the extraction of abscesses in women, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is inserted, then you stop powder on the location and strengthen it with pulvis and strict descent, and do not iterate that; and leave the abscess alone and do not extract it, because otherwise the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the acidity of the blood is cleansed, then place warm cloths on the affected area, and return to your usual operation so that the fever may be forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About the treatment of hernia with a burning remedy.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not just an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane that contains the humor, and it is named membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some evacuations are in the proper natural preparation of the part of the humor, so that it is known that there is another humor; and it is the code of the genius between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not just bitter.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genius, because in those it is founded, and some veins are affected by percussion or blows on the genius.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or blood-red, or red, or black and filthy, or whitish-yellow, and that is what is worst.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that this aggregation of water is such: because if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess is declining a little in length, thus forming the figure of a humor, and the genius appears, because the humidity contains all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its proper natural part, then the abscess is declining in the part of the humor and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the code of the genius and the white membrane, then it takes away the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you examine the color of the humidity in the abscess, which is surrounded by a circle of inflammation, and according to what is seen in the vestige of the inflammation, judge that it is deducted from there.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of the iron deficiency, then it is necessary that we command the patient to take flebotomate if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the iron.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then return to re-supinate over the two fingers on some cause a little higher, and stop there for a few drops.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place you on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod from two lines to the code of the genius and to the part of the miraculous ventricle.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and separate the code of the genius from my middle place for the length, so as to approach the fifth finger.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to the rectified engagement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genius, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert it; and your scraping is the one that scrapes for the part of the humor, which is suspended in the worst humor and subtly examined in the scraping according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the membrane full of water with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with uncials, and extend the membrane to the upper parts; and do not touch the code of the genius comprehending, and insert the membrane in such a way that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it in its totality or in pieces, and enlarge the subtle finger slowly, because if you do not make the insertion of it exquisitely, it is not made securely so that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	More so the humor proceeds from that defect of its code at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the membrane, return to deduct it, and then adjust the two lips of the code of the genius with a suture, and then treat it thus like other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the humor is corrupted by another bad quality, then it is necessary that you lift the vessels which are above the suspensors, and extract the humor, and then treat it thus in what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	More so the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore insert that part according to what was done in the other engagement; and if it is seen by you that it is a work, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you purify the blood, and enter into the clear sections of the submerged oil or rozated oil; and stop before another section which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over two geniuses and the miraculous ventricle; and stop above drops of doubled oil and pulvils, and tie them above the liament which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two drops and fill the submerged oil according to this likeness; and make points on the extremities which are premuted by cot or humid oil, and add structure in the braquier of the arms, and one of the extremities takes hold of the cul up to the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the fifth finger, and two extremities over two thighs below and two other extremities over two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the braquier of the arms.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in the area of the section in iron; and it is that you should take a subtle cutting cautery and insert it into the codename of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what has been recommended, until the white ciphac containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled into a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then you pierce that ciphac, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then you extend the ciphac into inches, and scrape them with inches, and scrape them with a subtle ignited cautery; and you insert it according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the hole that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more salvageable and farther from the flow of blood, and better than an operation in section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Perhaps if you find an opposing apostem to the cautery at the time of section or at the time of cautery, or flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure which opposing apostem you have for that, with a curative treatment that suits it according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Perhaps if the patient is weak, and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which has been said about the symptoms, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary that you seat the patient on a certain elevated chair, then perforate the apostem at the lowest part of their spatium laterally, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it is the broad perception until all the water is drained.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then stop at the short place and tie it with a ligature, so that the remaining water is drained.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Perhaps if the opposition is at the urgency of the water at that hour you perforate it: and this is not done except for when the white pannicle in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the issuance of the water, then it is necessary that you put in the wound a pain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropitz, in the form which precedes; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is augmented after six months or around those; and as it is augmented, then it should be perforated according to that same method, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About section on fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section about this hernia, there is a great fear of losing it due to the major dispositions; because for me it has been seen as a dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded of the operation on that and the species of the apostems.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the apostems are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: either for acute sharp inflammation, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apostem according to the color of the body, and it is not troubled by pain, and it is a heavy apostem.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And therefore it is a lappified apostem, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel anything.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some hernias are caused by nodulation of the arteries, and for inflation of those also because it has not perceived the memory of it, or for inflation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Perhaps it is for inflation of arteries that is recognized by the dispersion of the apostem when it compresses them with its fingers; and it does not seem that it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Perhaps that which is caused by inflation of a vein is not dispersed from some cause, because of the compression with its fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that about this species a section was made and about the other carnal parts; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and then stop the hole at the superior parts, and extract it from the white ciphac, and remove the suspensori of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensori so that you remove it from all the superior parts of the hole.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hole is already consolidated in those carnal parts, then it is necessary that you extract the hole and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if it is adhesion until some cause of the ciphac, or between what is between the veins, then it is necessary that you remove all that adhesion and insert it for a round insertion.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps if it is a birth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of it, and extract the hole thus as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the woolen pouch with oil and rose water, and take care to cure the other wounds from within so that they may be healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	About the treatment of hernia that is of a vitrine (glass-like) nature.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess enclosed by some wrapping resembling a bruise with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult the exercise of movement and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is by fear for water of which it is preceded by remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I think that I should advise operation in that case, as I did with the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should place the patient on a elevated seat; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie the cord of the genitals with threads that are probably tied to the rods; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend those with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert a spatula laterally through a transverse incision in the right of the veins, until the veins are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off the entire affected area, just as you have said in the extraction of artery roots which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then leave a needle in which there is double filament, and tie it at the beginning of the place where you have inserted life, and tie the other end in the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert them in the middle place for a right incision according to the length of the body, and extract the water that is augmented by the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with a cure for the other wounds in which you want to be healthy, so that the veins, which are not nourished by one of the two genitals, may not be bad for it.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if life is inserted into all the veins, then I think that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for it are cut off from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the insertion of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that they are cut off so that there is no youthful vigor in them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	About the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that ends in the extended cipher above the belly on the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by sending the intestines of that rupture to another place of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cipher or of exhaustion of it, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by outcry, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the cipher, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess enclosed within, until you feel the pain, so that the cipher compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is by incision of the cipher, because at the beginning it makes a vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess appearing differently below the fallen cord, and this is by evacuation of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the cipher.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some evacuations are outside the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia circling around.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some evacuations are made in the ventosity, and some evacuations run into the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is a great perturbation of the illness, and some evacuations make bad pain and worsening when it is premature.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the species of this illness iron is feared, because I think that it should be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity through the parts within its conquest, if it obeys to its own returnment, and then it is invested above the column between your two hands, and raises the legs of it.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stop the cord which is the cord of the testicles at the lower parts, and insert the entire cord of the testicles for the length; and then fix it in two labia of the incision uncis according to what you need to close the incision with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision is according to the quantity that it is possible for you, then the hole may be evacuated from that.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape off that membrane which is below the cord of the testicles, until the white and hard cipher of each part is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert the thread said in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white cipher, which is below the cord of the hole, and between the cipher according to, and absolve with that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then you should place the hand on the back of the testicles, and also extend the white wax on the hand to the left side, and elevate the finger on the wax to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the finger in it and dissolve the adhesion that is behind the solution completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	You should search for the veins there, to see if there is not any cause of the intestine wrapped in the hard white wax.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	Maybe you will find some cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly from below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you will take a needle in which there are four thick threads, and insert it into the rear of the wax, which is behind the back of the testicles, which is a section; and then you will thread the extremities that come out of the thread within so that they make four threads, and then you will compose some figures on top of each other in the form of a cross; and there you will attach the wax that we have said is behind the back of the testicles with strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you will envelop the extremities of the threads and attach them with strong binding within so that none of the veins that are not pierced can transmit any cause, so that from here on, an abscess does not occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another ligature according to the first ligature, three fingers from the hand; and then you will ask for two ligatures on the wax that is behind the back of the testicles, as much as the greatness of the finger, and you will thread all the remainder according to roundness, and remove the finger from it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then you will thread into the part behind the back of the testicles for a section from which clear blood and sane serum will flow, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then you will administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligature that we have recommended (and some veiled white wax is cauterized, which we have said to thread into the temenos of flux of blood, because many veiled ones occur) and release the ligature within so that it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Maybe the healing of it is delayed, then warm water should be poured, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then you will cure the plague with another cure for plagues until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	About windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been hardened under the cure of the iron hammer.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it was done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with us; which is that you lift the veins towards the section above that and make a cut in the middle place around the abscess in what you open, until the veins fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some veiled ones cause rupture in the ankles thus as we have said, and empty the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not show any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in a few hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Maybe if the time is prolonged in this, it is adjusted to make a fissure in the wax until the intestine descends into the wax; and it occurs thus for the extension of the wax which is in the ankles as we have said, which causes because the wax is extended, and then it is softened and the place becomes abscessed and empty.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with a cautery thus as the narration of it has preceded.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some veiled ones are cured with iron according to this method: it is that the patient lies on their back between the two hands, and then you make a cut in the place of the rupture of the abscesses emptying into a section according to the latitude as much as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then you will strengthen the white wax that is behind the back until it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then you will take the vein and pause it on the prominent place of the wax, and press it onto the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then you will kiss the two prominent places on the extremity of the vein of the wax, and adjust one of them to the other with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then you will extract the extremity of the vein, and do not thread into the wax at all, nor extend the finger, nor any other cause thus as you know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then you will cure it with the cure of plagues, and as you thread the veins, purify it and restore the plague until it is consolidated; because the wax is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proximal to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 18.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the codename of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Moisture is softened in the codename of the testicles in some men it is softened by thus quar because the flesh that is there is softened, and its treatment is neglected.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient sit according to his two hips, and to sew up the entire codename which is softened over the natural codename; and then adjust both lips at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, thus in the beginning the redundancy of the softened codename with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then take care to cure other wounds within so that it may be healthy and the veins may flow.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 19.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is so that the doctor may be knowledgeable about the cure of those who are affected by it, who knows how to treat it; and the other reason is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our young animals, like mules, and goats, and pigs, and similar to these animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by section of the seed.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	Moreover in that which is done by attrition, the method of operation is that we make the animal sit in hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand into the wound so that they are resolved and do not appear again in the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Moreover in castration done by section and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspenders, and insert above each one of them a section until two vessels proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those pus so that they may be drained out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave anything above them on the groin for any reason, but rather the subtle groin which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And in this way of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly loosens the cord of the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then take care to cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 20.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is when it appears that the space in the cord of the testicles is empty, in which case there are two testicles figured like a female's, and they are felt.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes moisture appears from that place where urine is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Moreover in women it is a species: and it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is thus like two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all dimensions, and it is divided into two parts thus like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two in men and of one species in women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted flesh into the wound so that it expels the pus of that, and then you cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men, in which urine is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On Abortion and Eminent Flesh Caused by Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Abortion is strongly adjusted by natural causes until it is stopped and it is done with regard; and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it spreads thus like in men and pervades until the coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore it is necessary that you hold the redundancy of abortion with your hand or with a hook and insert.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not delay in inserting, rather in the region of the womb, so that there is no efflux of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Moreover, born flesh is flesh that grows in the womb of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is situated in the parts before according to the semblance of a snake (and for this reason some first call it "malautia caudada"); therefore it is necessary that we insert thus like inserting abortion, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Cure of Gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the womb of the woman is not perforated, or is the small passage.
E es o natural o accidental.	It is either a natural or accidental condition.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident is due to a bad mixture that has preceded it, and this is caused by poorly adjusted flesh or subtle and sparse blood.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is made in the prison of the matrix, or in its ribs, or in the upper pus of it, or in the lower pus of it, and prohibits quietude and pregnancy and childhood, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the recognition of it is made by observation of the uterus, if the obstacle is apparent, propitiate; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with the ties of the fingers or at the radius.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstacle is due to subtle blood, and it is propelled to the two lips, then you touch and disrupt it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it stops over the two labial pustules, and then you pause with the fingers of both hands to indicate the worst symptoms.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman lies on her back, her thighs extended, and then you extend the two lips inward so that the subtle blood is ruptured and the obstacle is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take a lantern and anoint the oil on it, and place it over the area, and leave it there for a day so that the affected area is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the blood is thick and sparse, then you need to inject that with a wide spatula or a full spoon of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstacle is due to flesh, then suspend it with an onion, and inject that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And there are the medicines that stop the flow of bloody wounds, such as achaetia, and dragon's blood, and others, adjusted with album of wolf's [bile].
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide ampulla of lead plaster so that the wound is not consolidated too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer lukewarm water of dry wine.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some old wisdom is hidden in the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary to inject according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for cancerous apostemes, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the matrix not made contrary with iron in any method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 83.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that are hidden in the confines of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins until those corrode blood continuously; and how antiquated hemorrhoids are and are made tails.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the prison of the matrix and do not appear to the senses, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifice of the matrix above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tail into the furrows, or with sharp drag, and inject that into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those with the flow of blood from one of the pulverizing powders that stop wounds, such as achaetia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soften the soles of the feet for an hour, and then place it in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and of scorches of millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and mix that with honey and wine and make an emplaster with water over the back of it.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is abscessed, good; and if not, make adhere to two vents, and to the nipples with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take a lantern and submerge it in the juice of colyander or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarrievier with wine, and make adhere to the area; and then cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But the royal rule which is of sharp observation, it is necessary that you inject water that appears to you according to what I have said in the royal engagement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 84.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of accidental hernia in the matrix.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of apostemes are hidden in the matrix, such as cancer and lapident aposteme and ulcers and adherent and erupting and fistulous hemorrhoids and raguarrhias and thyl and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said about these bad mixtures and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	I think the text means:
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then I think the text means:
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then I think the text means:
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then I think the text means:
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then I think the text means:
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	Then I think the text means:
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Then I think the text means:
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	Then I think the text means:
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	Then I think the text means:
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Then I think the text means:
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then I think the text means:
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Then I think the text means:
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	Then I think the text means:
Capitol .lxxv.	I think the text means:
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Then I think the text means:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Then I think the text means:
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then I think the text means:
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Then I think the text means: Then I think the text means:
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Then I think the text means:
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	Then I think the text means:
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	Then I think the text means:
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then you should insert the measuring rod between the patient's fingers to feel if there is any warmth or moisture in it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	Press the woman's belly inward so that she can breathe deeply into her womb.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if she does not breathe, then it is necessary that the woman be treated with poultices of thyme and fenugreek on her abdomen.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her to take a deep breath, and then compress her abdomen, so that it may stir up the condition; and close her mouth and nose for an hour, because the womb will be purified as much as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two wombs are completely purified at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them to fertility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet above hers, and then place the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the wombs are not properly turned and the womb dies, then cut into them and extract the contents of the womb or tie it to her arm with a bandage and extract that which is equal, because it will be purified.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the movement of the embryo on the soles of the feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the womb settles on the soles of the feet, then it is necessary that you impel them upwards, and then convert the womb to a small one, and then that it swallows it, and then take one of its feet and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are settled within the thighs, then you command her to exert herself, and make that external movement in condition, because it will be purified if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not purified in what we have recommended, then you return the womb to its natural figure little by little, so that it will be purified later with a lighter movement.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altaea and dissolved gum, and pound everything well in the mortar for good percussion, and then smear it on the womb of the woman, below her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that poultice into a warm bath, until you obtain the desired effects.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts below her are softened, then make a subtle fumigation of myrtle and subtly pause it on her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the subtle fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make that stirring and close her mouth, and lift it from there, and press the lower part of her belly with a lighter compression, because the womb will be purified as much as possible.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Movement of the womb on the soles of the teeth and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the womb moves according to this form, then you ingeniously introduce between her hands little by little; and then the woman remains seated on a stool, and her feet are bent under, and they are placed on the bed, and complete with her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on her belly little by little, and then extract what is below her feet from the aurelia until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the womb is not purified, then take her feet and move them vehemently, and then press what is above the hips little by little until the womb can reach the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then introduce her hands and swallow the womb little by little, and command the woman to exert herself until the womb is purified.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Movement of the womb laterally during one of her hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is ingeniously reduced in the hand of hers, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and shake her thighs with a strong concussion, and then administer gentle treatments with the recommended poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the inflammation has come, then make her sit on a chair, and then study the reduction of her hand, and swallow the womb according to its natural figure, and make the woman stir and command her to compress herself until it is purified.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Movement of the womb on the expanded colon, with her hands and the surface of her belly towards her mother's back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife holds the hand of the womb and then revolves it little by little, and that which facilitates it.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is thus and as much as it is swallowed, then stop on the womb of hers that we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to swallow little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to incline herself on the right side, and then command her to compress herself; and make that stirring in condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	A prepared fetus lies on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you examine a horrible wound on the mother according to this method, consider, and then you insert your finger into the uterus to evacuate the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck, then you insert that of the naval, so it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you push the fetus into the birth channels until it pauses according to what is covered, and command the woman to take some gentle pushes, and the surgeon will be ready for the delivery, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The departure of twins or a multiple birth.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that many twins are born weak, and some are not nourished for three or four months, but that is strange and difficult to understand; but I know the causes of abnormal nature, and it's not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each of those umbilical cords. Some are born naturally, and some are born through unnatural means, and thus some are born naturally, while others are born through unnatural and unlawful means, just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult cases of their birth and conception, and you arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you cure them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what makes it easy and subtle, and delays, and is ingenious according to the whole figure, just as it is prepared by the engendering in order to bring health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	The remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some wounds are formed in the hand one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman who has aborted does not get it, and another one with all forms, which causes false points for measuring the wise glorious savers.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all that is covered in the science of the midwife, because it is strong enough to help that small being, and therefore I stop here as I have said.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it's not before existed, and you are forced to use opposing operation on the mother, then it is good to consider if the woman is of sane virtue and not at risk of accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is good that the woman should be placed on a mattress on her back with her legs elevated, and her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs should be raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister holds that of two parts or is bound to the mattress so that the body of the woman does not extend itself during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you humidify the mouth of the mother with oils and with mucus from the altar and from fenugreek and from sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand into the mother, and then seeks the place where the fingers are on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to come out onto the back of the head, and then you place your fingers on its heels, or on its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or below the beard, or in its armpit, or in the convenient places of its ribs, or below the hypochondries.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Moreover, if the delivery is over the feet of the fetus, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is good to hold the finger on the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand facilitated and place the finger in some of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause of the birth.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place another finger in opposition to it, or the third if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its own rectitude alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is all divided, so that the delivery of it may be alleviated just as it is done in tooth extraction, with the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is good in that which is between them that the extension may be mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is good that the midwife anoints her fingers with oil and inserts them expertly and revolves them in that which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers are permitted to enter the place where it was put out; and do thus until all of the fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is ossified within the other, and it's not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of the muscles, then it's necessary that the dressing be enveloped around it; and then extract it so that the whole thing is forgotten, and insert it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it's necessary to make points on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the foot is large, or if it's constricted in the ossification, or if it's in the head of the adjusted water, then it's necessary to introduce between the toes spatula-shaped spines and break the head and extract the water, or that which discards this with an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is about to come.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, it makes sense if the foot is naturally large-headed: and then it's necessary to insert that with an alkaline substance, or to take that with an alundum as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is ossified and constricted towards the ankle, then it's necessary to be opened until the humidity which is in the foot is released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it's not complicated, nor ossified, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the intestines of the belly are apostemated or are in a hydropic state, then it's necessary to perforate that until the humidity that is in them is drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the feet are upon the six toes, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the matrix is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If it's constricted towards the belly and the foot, then it's necessary that you extract that with a dressing which you will have enveloped around your hand, and that you open the belly and the foot until what is in them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are numb and turned towards the head, then the measuring instrument is introduced into the left hand; if the mouth of the matrix is opened, then introduce the hand into the opening of the instrument, and seek out that with the head, and direct it towards the toes until it reaches the mouth of the matrix, and then introduce it into one or two inches, and direct it towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted due to apostema, which contracts towards the ulcer, then it's necessary that you don't touch it; instead, it's necessary to administer an infusion of humid, fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plaster; and follow the patient with remedies that mollify and humidify.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is on the sixth rib, then if it's possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the previous foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in pieces, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it's necessary that you don't leave any cause of the second inflammation.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of the apostemas caused by the ulcers that contract towards the matrix.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it contracts with a flow of blood, then apply styptic remedies and administer another cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom it was said that she was dead, and then on that same spot another conceived embryo, and then the dead foot is another.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to him that for a long time an ulceration occurred in the sixth embryo; and it swelled until it became a swollen belly, and began to take on a crooked shape.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his cure, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I paused regarding him about some causes of emplastered strong attraction, and ossified one bone, and then passed several days, and ossified another bone; and I was too marvelously surprised, as if there were no bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead foot.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in the six thousand disposed milieux, and I saw her in such a manner for a long time, correcting one little crooked shape.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I didn't find it strange, but rather that it's science and help to what the artificial hand does in the cure by administering.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a vertex in which the matrix is opened.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher in which the books are bound, to which binding two vertices are on both extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	I command that this vertex be made more subtle than the stretcher, and be made of ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the latitude of each wood be two fingers and a margin of each one wood be one finger, and the longitude of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two woods there are two adjustments of those same woods which were already fixed, of which the longitude is a palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And you should give two additional ingredients that are inserted into the mouth of the mother ( uterus ) so that it is opened when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form appears similar to this, but more subtle and more languid:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made from the juice of ivy or of boxwood according to the similarity of forces.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Moreover, in the extremity of his body there are two additional aids, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then you make the woman sit on a sheet with her feet pendant, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then you open your hand with the instrument, thus making a forceps-like grip according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the womb, until the midwife makes it so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of virtue which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of thrusting in which the fetus is thrust out:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of assisting in which the head is constricted grandly
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like a forceps which bites into the extremity, thus many times, and some veins are made long thus like forceps according to this form, thus many times, which bites thus like the bite of reservation in which it is incised and constricted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of assisting little by little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which bites into the flesh in which the head of the fetus is constricted:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities at which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when I multiply the species of that and prepare them for the artisans, it is easier to operate on them and more suitable for the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those instruments that are not suitable for you to handle, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	About the extraction of the afterbirth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained due to the infant's effort, then you command the midwife to retain it there, and then make that stirring in condition, and stretch your hand over the mouth of it and over its nostrils, and if by so doing it is delivered easily, good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate in the covering a hole and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the womb, thus with calamine and rough and anet and chamomile and sicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of their kind are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that over the font.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then pause a cane tube in the mouth of the womb, and hold that until the vapor comes to the concavity of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that stirring as I have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Moreover, if this cure is not effective, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of sisami or in a mixture of other herbs, and then insert that into the vagina and seek out the afterbirth with it, and when you have found it, take it out little by little. If it is attached to the womb, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have felt the afterbirth, extract it slowly so that the womb does not collapse from the vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Beforehand, make sure that the right and left sides are exchanged to facilitate.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust according to the quantity of attraction, because it will obey and evacuate from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have not recommended the cure with stirring and medication of the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Moreover, if it is not expelled for all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is certain that what is ejected from it at the mouth of the womb lies in the thigh of the woman, and then crystallize that in injection and tetrapharmacon; because that will make it dissolve and be expelled after some days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Moreover, when it is ejected, it is elevated as a bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that leads the midwife to administer sub-fumigations and convenient things to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Moreover, some of the Ancients already used sub-fumigation of nitrite and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument in which the woman is fumigated from the retention of menses and of the afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made from glass or from copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The extremity is placed subtly in the container and the larger extremity is placed above the fire, and the subtle fumigation is placed above the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	You hold that thing in which the subtle fumigation is consumed, and you iterate another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	From the care of the infant's unperforated buttock.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants are born with their buttocks not perforated, which have a subtle and obstructed anus.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then advise the midwife to perforate it with that finger; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place a poultice over that infant's swollen vein, and take care of that limb until it is healthy.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it is obstructed, then place a cannula in the tract for many days, and wait until the infant will be able to expel.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And you hasten the obstruction of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; then advise that this consolidation be incised, and take care to be cured with what we have said about the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur below the perineum are usually low and narrow, and those that occur near the anus or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node is old and corroded by the acidic white humidity or subtle pus, and some veins are derived from these fistulas, some penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known for what is ejected from them through the outlet and through ventilation; and some veins use the badness of outlet, and therefore they are ejected from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And from those fistulas some veins are derived in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and from those penetrating ones into the joint of the thigh and into the node of the coccyx.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating, is that you put your finger in the anus, and you feel a subtle thread of iron or of ferrum in the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If it is twisted, then you insert into that subtle thread of lead or of horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progression of the tract nor any cause of evacuation nor worm nor ventilation, thus as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it until the place where medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread is perceived entering here if it is not twisted into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the part; and that sometimes it produces pus; and that it does not work with that medicine, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of them is troublesome and vain effort by foolish doctors over which they boast.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	If it is not penetrating and not old, health may be hoped for with iron treatment, as I have recommended to you, and that which has already been done and proposed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the badness goes between your hands over the two fingers and raises the arms of it towards them, the thighs are inclined towards its belly, and then you insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the twisted fistula, until you feel the place where the thread is perceived.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it feels the badness around the neck, then advise that you insert your finger inside the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger the thread that has already been discovered to penetrate, or what you feel between your finger and that siphus or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not trouble yourself about it, because there is no health in it, thus as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Perhaps some emperors said that some are healthy in some harsh homes.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And from the medicine by which youth is hoped for in it, that you ignite subtle cauteries according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously stated, and you insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it penetrates around the neck; and then you iterate those two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh fistulas which seem like a feather of a bird's wing are fully healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then you care for that with warm wraps enveloped in cloth until they can heal all those adjusted flesh, and then you care for that with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If you insert a tube inside and it doesn't penetrate into the tissue where it is in the colon, and between that and the tube which is merely a fleshy or cartilaginous part, and sometimes the fistula forms on the surface of the codena, then cauterize the codena from the commencement of the fistula, and you will see that the tube is cauterized, and it is inside the fistula until the cauterization pervades to the place where it touches the extremity of the tube, and by the tube it is freed and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are assembled around the painful canal of the anus and do not rupture them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Maybe it is necessary to cleanse the wounds several times until they come between you and your operation when you insert them, then the thousandth time it will be of the pus-less instrument to cauterize with fire or medicine acute, because cauterizing with fire adjusts good habits: so it is an adjustment of those adjusted wounds, and excision of the sanious exudation from the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat those wrapped ulcers in bandages or in causes that are settled in the location until it gets better, and then treat the plague with a hard, lasting, and consolidating medicine.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these are the medicines that are stipulated and excised; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not have relapses.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Maybe the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum of the colon and is elongated from the surface of the body, then enter the tissue said in the colon and investigate there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel the tube and it is merely cartilaginous or fleshy, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it unless according to a way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to administer in one of three ways: either cauterize that thus as we have said; or you cut into it until you reach the cavity of the intestine so that it is possible for you to enter the fistula and the propounded cure; and do not process too much with the cutting so that you do not incise the containing layer of the intestine, and you ascend over the patient's thigh with a gentle movement, as is your will; or you elongate that fleshy part and remove that pus which cuts into it towards the colon, thus as we have said, either with a tube or another instrument of acute extremity, and cleanse those fistulated wounds which are in the cutting into the oneness of the crustation; and strive to make the restoration of all the plague in the cutting, and if the horrible pus does not consolidate, and ruptures the herniated fistula in the part of the colon, and it will be less painful for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And the fistula is finally finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tube into the fistula, and it is in the region of the colon around the surface of the body at the codena and in the margin of the colon, then take the tube of perforated extremity, which is thus like a prepared needle, preparing the flanks according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and enter into that wrapped file of five files or around those; and then enter the tube into the file in the fistula until you reach the cavity of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Maybe it is penetrating into the margin of the colon quite deeply, then you extract the file from that tract thus that you insert the tissue said in the colon; and you remove the extremity of the file and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when maybe you incise the file into the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh are incised which are between the two extremities of the file and fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Maybe the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not too much in the perineum, because it is not for you to do that so that you do not incise the containing layer; and then make it enter until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatula is like this which is bent to meet the fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that you do not incise what is not necessary, thus sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	About stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are thus according to two methods, because either they are between the colon resembling a carbuncle, or those are like a fat of radish.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from those sometimes and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the colon, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Maybe those that are outside the colon are according to the measurements of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous cos, and thus according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is deeply in the colon is that you command the patient to sit down and to exert themselves until the colon is evacuated and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should cut and suspend an inch above where you hold those in your finger, and then insert them into their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Perhaps the nails are not held in those for their humidity and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a cotton thread or a lanolin dressing, and extract those from the fingers, and then insert them into powdered caustic powders to prevent burning; or cauterize those according to what is written in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with another cure until they are completely healthy.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the excretion, then crystallize the patient in a crystal container where it is slightly bitter, and wash them with that water which is in the bowel and helps to facilitate excretion more easily when the patient is prepared.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Perhaps the hemorrhoids are blocking the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take those with your finger, or take those with an inch, and insert them, and then heal those with water that we have said until they are completely healthy.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And to those who have undergone incision, it is necessary to administer sutures according to this method: take a threaded needle and insert it into the hollow of the aguja, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make that penetrate into the hollow of the other part, and envelop the two extreme threads of the needle around the part below the aguja, and thus latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then knot the thread and extract the aguja.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make that into a whole, and leave one of those open and not sewn, so that the superfluity of blood can flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a dressing over the anus, either infused with rose oil or cerate; and place that over the bowel and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that until it crusts; and when it falls off, heal those with an ointment or another cure until they are healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Softened moles are applied for excision of a wound or for constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, it is necessary to root them out with the point of a spatula or with your finger until they are made humid and held back by the scab that forms beneath, which prevents their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove them with a violent root out, more vigorously at first until no blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are completely healthy.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the cure of wounds, that is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that wounds, that is clear, and it is not so unless you notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it is made throughout the whole body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends with those pains that give the annoyance.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that what is in the circuit of the wound be incised, and held with forceps or an inch, and eradicated from its root; and then heal that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the following as written in the seventh chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Perhaps a wart is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and soft moles come on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure of it is to stretch and insert that, or to strengthen that with a thread or a hair until it crusts.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus eradicated inverted and non-inverted ones with the instrument which you will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Perhaps an anthill is a small, rough, fistula-like growth on the surface of the body next to the elbow, and when it touches that, it becomes centred in the likeness of morbid formation of anthills, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure of it is to take a hollow cane of elder tree or of voltor, and make it strong, and place that over the anthill until it contains the circle of the cane around its parts; and then revolve your hand with the cane until you insert what is in the circuit of the anthill, and pause that in the elbow of the flesh, and eradicate the anthill from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make that with a cane of iron or copper according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part below the cane holder is subtle, solid (it is not perforated), enveloped so that above it the grasp of it is abolished and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the anthill according to what has been said before in the chapter on cauterizing of atheyl.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that are administered to give consolation.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some medications are made of silver or gold or copper or tin alloy; and some medications are made of those small and large instruments according to the ones that are administered, because what is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose veins are fragile or delicate, the medications of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few medications:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube from underneath which is tied to the bag should be wide according to this manner; and it should be distant from where the bag is tied, thus sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the tube from below, which is inserted into the vein, should be smooth (not rough) like a lion, subtly entering; and on one side of the tube there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the size of the roots and thus a small one becomes bigger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which are placed the medications of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and its size should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced for many channels thus as it is revolving; and if the space which is between the channels is very large.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude fiber, or around those; and adjust it to the bag; and when it is placed in the bag, it should be tightened at the head of the medication between two distinct and strong constrictions, and then medicate through each channel: The quality of medicating through that channel is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and lift their legs up high and place one roll above them where the veins are or a lancet; and then apply the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the vein to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts it twice or three times until it is evacuated from the intestine as much as is in the medication; and then remove the medication and the patient lifts their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that out of the sediment, hold it as much as you can; and if it sleeps through the whole night, it is better for its recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Better if you medicate that in the illnesses of dissolution of stomach and sedimentation of the gut, then you iterate the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the vein there are emorrhoids or painful apostems, then the medication should be subtle and gentle, among the medications which children are usually medicated with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	About the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is convenient to the book, and I will say thus the treatment of those with mother and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place on which they occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why many wounds are made are thus like a blow of stone, or incision of space or of cutting, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a sagitta, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Better the wounds that are in the places of the body thus like a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance of the composed parts will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when there are simple head wounds and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's from a blow of stone or similar, and you have already cleaned the wound as much as possible and it's a great wound and you fear about that patient having an aposteme caut, then you should cauterize and phlebotomize the cephalic vein immediately, and don't delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it should be phlebotomy of the contrary part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's relapse and of wine and of gross vintages.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Better if from the minor prohibition some cause is forbidden, then it should be diminished of wine and not approached to flesh nor to wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the wound, if it has an aposteme caut, cut off the inflamed part with oil of rose or in wine in which it is stipulated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	It is certain to remove the putrid pus from the wound, then stop above the plague, if it recently sits in the holy seat and the air has not changed that powder which you recommend to apply little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that powder, then stop above the swollen gums until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or is due to infection of the space and similarity, and its lips are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them in a suture according to what you recommend for the suture of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it does not retain its own except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply proper care to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of the cartilage, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is grossness: cabbage and fermented fish and similarity to theirs, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find rotten decay in the cartilage and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all that putrid matter and remove it, and apply proper care to that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows holy blood that may come, and it is not separated by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find it unseparated, then cut out that with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessary, provoke what we have said does not conflict, then cauterize until the blood is separated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of theirs is light; similarly, you powder over them with this powder, because consolidated in that manner, so that the air does not change them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, holy dragon's blood two parts, unextinguished fire three parts; crush everything thoroughly and crumble it, and fill the wound with it, and constrict it with good constriction until it be on that scar, and coagulate it with the holy blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen that from below with pules and lift it, and do not dislodge it while it is thus that it is not putrid, because it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some old wise men make that sole remedy, when there is not in your presence iris and holy dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And already make this moderate operation in great wounds when it is convenient to stop above them and they are strengthened, and thus recent wounds with their holy blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then do not intend to apply this powder, but rather take care of those with what we have said, similarly that you stop above those swollen gums digesting, or that you stop above those pores of the flour of the ordinary water and honey until they get purification; and apply proper care to them with another cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you encounter a fracture wound in the bone, and it is small, then extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you will direct the cure of fractures of the head in what is incoming.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the wound occurs on the neck, then it is not in the difference of medicine, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the engendering but that the cure of it should be avoided with what makes vehement stipulation, similarly as ziniar and zegi that it is vetriol and similar to theirs because noxious to the nerves and contradicting that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not stop above the wound for any cause of total freshness, because the substance of the nerves is fresh and their continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that is cured by light medicines, similarly as it is caused by washing with warm water, some veiled infusion in rose oil or non-rose oil, and thus when it is washed with warm water and other minor wounds are treated according to this manner, and swollen humors.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer suture, or bind its lips, and apply proper care to it with pules until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound is deep or occurs in the part below the pus, then pierce that at the place most prone to putridity.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound an artery is cut and a flow of blood occurs, then separate or dry that, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke to that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have cut the vertebrae of the throat or all, and thus saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the cartilage with suture over the cane of the throat and do not touch that; meanwhile equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with decent structure, and lift it for some days; and apply proper care to it in swollen gums where there is stipulation and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already infected the bone to make an ulcer, then percuss there, and if there is a fragment of bone, extract all that you can from it; and what you have not prepared, let it be inserted again so that the plague does not spread, and separate and clean the affected area.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder over it with the powder that you have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the plague has made a fistula, then cure it with what you have learned from memory, which will come back to you in the seventh chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the ulcers of the neck or of similar appearance when they are made between the spine and are made in the scapula or in the cutting or in the lance or in similar appearances.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the lance or of the cutting, and sometimes of its depth, then consider that if the plague has taken possession of the patient's body, then you know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the plague is recent in the seventh wound, then you pause on it at the first hour with powder, and do not stretch out for which the wound is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and waters the patient, rather pause on it with attractive ointments, and remove those two evil humors during the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present to you, then pause on the orrifici of the plague, cutting very well so that it sucks out what is of the humors; and make that the patient sleeps on the plague so that it corrects what is in him.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If you have passed three days or more of the plague and it does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and sometimes the other good dispositions of him, then you know that the plague is saved; and therefore cure it with warm remedies and the other curative treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is exhausted, and already all time is opened, then you know that a fistula has been made; therefore cure it according to the seventh chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is by incision of the scapula or of the cutting, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure it with what is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If you have made an ulcer in the bone, and you have already cut into it with pincers, then twist the plague and try to extract those pincers, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them enter so that the plague does not spread, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other plagues occurring in the other members, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ulcers of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which affects the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ulcerations that come from the intestine or nerve of the intestine, because it is made by introgression of them and the suture of them must be more violent and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introgression of them at the seventh place, because it opens and becomes gross due to the instrument of him being made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that converge in sutures of the other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate with the other plagues, but above all, they are proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Then I say that when the plague is small and it is caused by some intestine problem for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has received inflammation from the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is so, then you should scald that in this way that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in warm water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embroques with that into the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some ulcerations do this, where it has stipulated, and it is better than warm water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you humidify the intestine with water in which there are caught altaea and malvas, because by that the instrument of him is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the instrument of him is excavated to this cure, then you separate the disruption with a small instrument in which you have inserted emollients.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is properly done so that it doesn't become necessary to occupy and relieve through failure.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Take away the instrument, see if it's in its proper form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp twisting, and another non-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of a spatula, unless it becomes obtuse at a point.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the plague is amplified and goes beyond the intestine, then it's necessary that its reduction follows the natural form, in its proper place, if possible, because better is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Moreover when the disruption is great, and it's in the lower part of the belly, then it's necessary that you place the patient on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it's in the upper part of the belly, then you stop the head of the patient and their chest higher than the lower parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should direct your attention and consideration always to this, so that the part where the plague is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it's necessary that you administer this in severe plagues and in moderate ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, stop that which is prepared for you, and make sure that the minister is between your fingers, which holds the entire disruption under its hand and adjusts its lips, and uncover from that to whoever knows the suture of some cause or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts the threads according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then you pass through the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the thread once, so that you don't put faith in both ends of the code, both ends of the ciphac which is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added both ends of the code and both ends of the ciphac, and thus you form four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then you strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some divisions of both parts at the same time, and then you add both lips to the plague for decent addition; and then you pass through the grossness of the finger and fix another needle there, and then you tie it with double faith as you did with the first needle; and do not cease from doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you complete all the constriction of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And thus the moderate needles are between grossness and subtlety, because the subtle needles move more gently into the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult entry into the code, and therefore it's necessary that they be moderate in subtlety and grossness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it's not necessary that the needle be fixed in both ends of the code properly, so that the flesh is not gently wounded and that the plague does not heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And there are no prolonged sutures because the plague should not be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then you insert the ends of the needles so that they do not touch the patient's bed; and you sprinkle powder over the suture, expanding it throughout the entire part, which holds the ends of the needles; and thus you know that the plague is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suture with needles are more convenient in small plagues, because they have need of a suture of one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Moreover the second suture is communal: and it's that you administer a suture of the four ends, of the code and both ends of the ciphac, in one way, with a needle in which faith is involved in subtlety and grossness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle from that same part where it began, so that the faith retreats and draws back the inferior part of the plague, so that the suture is according to the suture of a drawstring in which the threads are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And stop between each suture the quantity of the grossness of the lesser finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture I have healed the plague that had afflicted a man in his belly, which was wounded in a wound, and it was the disruption of the greatest plague of one palm, and it was situated around two palms of the intestine in the middle place and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have reduced it from the time when the intestine had been outside the plague for 23 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in a space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then I saw him for many years, and he conversed about his dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healthy; and by a miracle it was done, because I did not cure him with an ointment, because he was in a place where no ointment was of use nor any medicine, but rather stopped over the plague many times a day and abluted assiduously with honey water until he was healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two species of proper sutures according to the narrative of Pareula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with a suture of the knee, and you insert a needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus as the needle penetrates into the knee and in that moment the blood flows according to the rectitude and in the length of the whole body, and there is the extremity of the scaphoid bone where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part, on the other side of the midsection.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And thus when you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the midsection from the front part to the back part; and there is the extremity of the scaphoid bone which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate from one extremity to the other, from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate there your penetration, which you do in the scaphoid bone in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of the inner thigh so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side of the ribcage and remove that from the extremity which is of the scaphoid bone on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the knee which penetrated, and then return it to the knee and thus the extremity of the scaphoid bone which is on the other side in this mirror's extremity; and withdraw it from the knee which is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and another, and do this one time then another time until you collect all that which is in front according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you collect a suture of pellicles in which you collect the skin, thus that you collect the scaphoid bone one time from the part of the extremity of the knee, and that you leave another time until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Moreover, the second species of proper suturing, which is called Gualia's method, and this is to be done by the serum of it and for its recommendation, is that you collect it according to similarity in which you add all parts to their comparable part conveniently by nature; and apply one extremity to another extremity of the mirror to another extremity of it, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is fitting that you hold the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your propitious moment of the front part, and make it penetrate to the back part on that soil, and leave two extremities of the scaphoid bone; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the scaphoid bone.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then revolve those circles, and make penetrate some circles of the back part until to the front part in two extremities of the mirror on the other side which are not in the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suturing is better than the common ligature, and it is a suturing of which I previously mentioned the remembrance.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is Gualia's serum.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more, the dissector says, a ventral suture is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert in these some threads, and begin with an introduction of a needle from what is your duty, and make it penetrate until the other side according to the suturing of those who collect the galls in engagement.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And it is known that when disruption is in the middle place of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medical treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is because when you congregate the recent plague with the holy blessed blood of the Lord, then the air alters that, and reduces the intestine and collects it and adapts it decently, then pauses over that incarnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that alcus gathering those who are present until they make strong and hard skin, and thus consolidate scaphoid bone and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the curing of other plagues until it is sanctified.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Moreover, if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that so much, because it begins to get worse, much evil, and permutates those two ways of the day, thus as you and your teacher, until it is sanctified, because you do not need other medicine in many dispositional motives when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Moreover, if you fear that the plague communicates in the lesions of the principal members, then it is fitting that you submerge the lanolin oil of tempered quality, or in rosated oil, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the axillas.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the holy intestines, because many ways that is intended, then crystallize that in vi stipptic black tea, and majorly if the powder is pervaded into the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	We know that what is of the large intestine is of more urgent healing than what is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gęgunu" does not receive healing from the plague that falls on it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and due to its magnitude that is in those, and due to the subtlety of the body of that, and due to the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Perhaps what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and consequently receives that recent reduction, reduces it according to your correct treatment in which you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Perhaps it has passed to the space and already becomes yellow or black, then when you stretch it over the area that is denounced of it, so that bad fluxes of blood come, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert what is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the thread pending from the partition below the plague foro it, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it deviates from the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the seven ventral parts with percussion of the lancet and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gesture and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore you should pursue the cure of it since it was not confused in its healing, perhaps you should subtly focus on entering that which sanitizes and consolidates the area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you put that you saw the area already consolidated, then look above the patient who falls above it because of the bad accident in the seven ventral parts; and do not fall into some bad accident and wounds in their many disposed milky mangling and being, and then enter in bath and is exercised in its digits.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already I showed you some experimented things that when plague falls in the intestine, and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take threads from large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and pause a thread of those that has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of it and stretch its mouth, it separates the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another thread next to the first one, and do not stop until you make threads in another way according to the quantity of the entire plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return it and thus the plague; and reunite those heads annexed in the intestine until the intestine is sanitized; and do not allow any bad nourishment.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And already it is possible that the intestine is tied with subtle thread which is made from the intestine of annexed beast, since it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it is not very descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of the beast, enveloped, and then insert that thread into needles and thus in that intestine, and return it to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suturing with threads is not just according to the way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	Perhaps the plague is great and ample, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not generated except by subtlety, and there is no total healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	We know that every plague and aposteme when they become inflamed and ancient, it makes an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and gets worse over time and does not abscise, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is called fistula and we do not call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a painful, hardened, white nodule which does not hurt and is conquered thus as it is conquered by the pain of a bird; and therefore it is called a calcified knot, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some humid homes which gets worse; and strongly the humidity is abscised in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some vegetables from this humidity are soft, and they are few, and they are large, and they are subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already denoted it in the division, then when you said the plagues, that every ulcer which is not healed nor is in the naked flesh, is not except for one of these nine causes: either because of little blood in the body; or because of malice in it; or because between it and the lips is hard flesh prohibiting nativity of flesh; or because it is of soft leg; or because that ulcer in itself meets with poyrit matter which is at its root of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in its cure; or when corruption falls in the region, and it is pestilential; or by property of region thus as it happens in Saragossa, where it is made difficult digestion of maladies, and it is delayed in that healing of aposteme by nature; or because in it there are bones, or many osses.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown you all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of their loves in medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I will teach you how to know the cure of fistula, which is done by way of operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give proximity to the principal member and likeness.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that among these fistulas which is according to this manner is of the evil diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is of the fistulas some depth that does not penetrate to these places that I have said, and you hope and confide in the cure of it, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes straight, and you acquire it in the hand.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle probe of lead, because lead in the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has very horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then crystallize the openings for their own openings, because the moisture by which you crystallize it goes away from the other openings and corrects their flow.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula at which many openings are above all that sums up your strength, in your introspection, in which you introspect the evil, and the invention of the pain from your compression on the hand over the place, and likeness of the signs and accidental causes to the aposteme.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long-standing from joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have and said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the openings of the flesh, or of the heel and of likeness, and cure it within so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is straight, then you should cut into that in the preceding part as much as possible, and then mundify that of all its corrupt flesh; and then administer some enveloped medicaments acutely, and introduce them within to the conquest of the fistula, which has been comprehended in iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that among those some evacuated within so that the acute medicine corrodes all that which remains in the conquest of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it among those who engender healthy flesh within so that it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is certified by you, then you should inquire into that and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and darkness, then you should root out that within so that the corruption may be held entirely; and then cure it among those who incarnate within so that it may be sanctified.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healthy and gives trouble as it did, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover again secondarily and exquisitely the reason of it and the mundification of it with the last fortaleza tieua, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the long-standing profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and then in that you do not generate but rather leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to attract it, then you attract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those you will not leave any cause in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have made contrary to some cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and extract the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause on the plague that you can hardly touch the plague there, and let it enter so that it is around the bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and be constricted in the section which you have inserted in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone above the three olive oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian vinegar, or in the juice of green olives, because when those ligaments are purified, and the bones are separated from their abstraction, and those attractions are alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone thus with the bone of leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which of it is corrupted is the face of it so alone, then cut away that bad and corrupt part entirely so that it is stopped, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which of it is corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and totally insert into the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you send someone to a house with his thigh so that he pauses there for some time and helps above your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Put a young man of around thirty years old, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the affected parts it is evident that the matter is above the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of abscess in a great abscess, and do not put it down to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then you will extend the time in that error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and correct the matters that are moved, and its cure will be paused until the leg becomes fistula, and make points in the orrificis motes which all get purulence and humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the multitudinous doctors around two years, and do not put faith in those wise men except in the art, until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the leg of that man and the matters that were running from that orrificis for a great body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced a probe into one of those orrificis and penetrated the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and examined all the orrificis and tried to penetrate to their origin in all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and dissected above one of those orrificis until I discovered a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the leg until it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cleared away what was discovered by me and prepared the bone that was uncovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I judged that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had cut away and cleared, and I had already destroyed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the plague with medicine consolidatives for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and discovered above the bone secondarily above the primary discovery, and I found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I cleared away what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I did perforate to make the cure of it and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered about the other way and did not cease to insert into the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, but it is not restored until I inserted around a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated gradually and healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of the fragility of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it hastens at all hours by superfluity of evacuation in syncopic evil.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healthy through entire sanity, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of it in the whole body and returned its virtue; and it is converted into its dispositions and did not make opposition in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already troubled, then cover that you seize it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it in the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend to its own; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the primary ligament; and then bind it above the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that it attracts the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place which you want to saw so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And stop putting a tablecloth underneath them, because when you do that it's not prohibited to serrate the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover the serrated area over the small corrupted part little by little, because if it's in the cavity of the corrupted bone and doesn't appear in its appearance to the sense, and strengthen the serration of the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it's one continuous part in the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and stop putting a tablecloth underneath, and stop serrating that of the first part where the corruption enters until the serration of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the serration according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint, and serrate the bone where it's connected to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then it's not in the reason but in the ingrown.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it's very difficult; however cover that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and take hold of that, and remove that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and make an effort so that everything is rectified for you, when not doing contrariety comes to you or nervousness.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know that the incisors and the serrations are suitable for incising those bones according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and their smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of operational instruments convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation means to you about the kind of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience with the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of illnesses, because then you would have them for yourself to measure what is convenient for each illness according to the instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simple as those which proceed to your prohibition which you will experience about the others.
Forma de serra:	Method of serration:
Forma de autra serra:	Method of another serration:
Forma de autra serra:	Method of another serration:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Method of another large serration:
Forma de ray:	Method of a groove:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this groove according to the form of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the form of the pointed alfefeigi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it's not convenient unless you confide in that groove the heads of the joints when they're corrupted, or it's a large and wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Method of the major razor of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Method of the minor razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Method of the wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Method of another serration done properly: it is made with an arched piece of iron above and the sharpness of the iron, and the member of the iron of boys is properly descended.
Forma de lu:	Method of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Method of the razor in which there is a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Method of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Method of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Method of a small razor resembling a probe:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Method of the incisors with which you incise the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Method of another minor incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Method of another incisor; this resembles a groove, and the extremity of it is like a serration, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Method of a groove that suits the ratio of that which is perforated in the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it's made of Indian iron, and similarly you know that all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and serrations.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremities and of the serration of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with a cure of those medicines and the cure doesn't concur, or sometimes the corruption wanders to the member which doesn't perceive any cause, then it's known that you incise that member until the honor reaches the corruption, so that the evil may escape through death or major defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens to him, is that the member becomes black until it's seen that fire has already burned, or it's weakened near the blackness until the weakening reaches that member which is its own and takes all the body; and thus you will have incision of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it's a cause of corruption from poisonous causes, such as from scorpion sting or viper bite or from rue and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you insert the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Likewise, if it reaches the hand, then you insert that from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you surround it, then insert the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond the elbow and surrounds the joint, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for the cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Likewise, it happens to the foot when corruption surrounds the toe of the foot, then you insert that into one of the nostrils.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold on the edge of the foot, then you insert the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Maybe it penetrates into the tooth, then you insert the leg up to the joint of the tooth.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the tooth, then there is no remedy except dismissal, and leaving the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of inserting the limb or of cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part below where you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until it is discovered completely; and then it is inserted or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And take care that there is a pad of linen cloths on all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient's adjusted lesion and abscess are cautious.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Maybe it happens that there is a flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the affected area strongly, or stop the bleeding with certain powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with a ligament in a convenient way, and take care of that until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that you undertake to go to a man in the city who has had this same accident, which you and I have recommended, which is because it happened to him in the city foot with adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happens primarily in the city finger until it reaches the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for such a method because he sees the cure coming to the limb with the violence of it that removes pain and adjustment of it, and inserts that foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time happened to him that same corruption in the finger of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I perfectly performed the removal of that superfluity on the hand of the medicines, then the purification of the body of it; and it does not remove the superfluity and begins to go to the other finger until it begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And it appeared to me to insert the hand of it, and I did not want to do that expecting about the removal of that superfluity, and maybe you should fear the insertion of the hand of death, because the virtue of the patient was on the decline.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and inserted his whole hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to be an aid concerning that which is said about this illness, and that it may be significant for what is signified and according to what is operated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it bursts and perforates, and it is drained of its blood, and one remains at the place where it was like a vessel, and the cord that is above it like a subtle drain, and it does not reach a further corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or in the nerve or in the ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Maybe sometimes the space is prolonged until the corruption begins in certain members, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that one inserts the entire cord like a spiral, and mainly when it is subtly drained and made like a drain, and it confirms that it does not adhere to the place for its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Maybe you hope that the cord adheres and that corruption does not achieve further consequences, and in the cord has passed with a gentle touch, then you cure that with cleansing.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then cleanse that with Egyptian medicinal oil which is of olive and vinegar and zinian receiving equal parts, and adjust them in a vessel, and place them over the fire until the medicine makes a noise and reaches a specific time for honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take of the water that is necessary and dissolve it in warm water and honey; and cleanse the wound with it, and strengthen the orifice, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that in precise measure; and do it for as many days as are needed until the wound is purified and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some vegetables are cleansed with warm water of cinder, when it is not present to you this medicine; and it is that you take the cinder of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then strain that and cleanse the wound until you confirm that the wound is healed at that time.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine nor the water of cinder, then cleanse the wound with warm water and honey, and mix zinc oxide three times, and cleanse the wound with warm water and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleanses, and the wax makes the wound adhere, and it is greater when the wax has overflowed with humidity and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do some vegetables and you confirm that the wound is already healed, then cleanse the wound with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take from the juice of dyaphinicon and dissolve it in oil of rose and wax; or that you cleanse with some medicines and other juices that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on juices.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the wound is narrow where the cannula of the syringe cannot be received, then you amplify it by inserting a small iron instrument little by little, and pause in the water enveloped in Egyptian juice or in basilicon juice until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you bring together the lips of the wound with suture and leave as much as possible in the quantity where the syringe is inserted.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the wound where the arm flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it in the lower place where it is in the arm so that the arm may flow until below, because when the arm is constricted at the beginning of the wound, the flesh will be engendered in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the wound until around the lower parts of the pus, then you must prepare the member with preparation for which the arm flows freely according to what appears and that there is no retention of any cause in the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed over the wound conveniently, adapted to what you want to extend those over a cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth is of such great quantity as it makes communication with all the wound; and then insert the forks in the right of the orifice of the wound, one track wide enough that the orifice of the wound; and then extend over another cloth of linen of the Egyptian juices according to the quantity of the track, and place it on top of that for a long position of the orifice of the wound so that the swelling of the arm is alleviated and no great cloth is needed unless you have some days' rest.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Moreover, that which is above the orifice of the wound, which is removed at all hours so that you may see what is adjusted in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also you consider the place of that wound, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is gathered over the orifice of the wound already adheres, or it acquires adherence, then you may delay it for two or three days, and when you delay the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the juice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Moreover, if the wound has a subtle and gentle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it is acquired, because some homes are in those where delayed generation of flesh occurs in those plagues, and of those that are done in those where the contrary of it is made.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the wound for many days is an indigested arm, then you know that the wound does not adhere; and if the adherence of the wound is delayed and it is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like Egyptian juice, when it is adjusted with an overflowing addition of zeigy.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last thing in what is cured, is that you take Egyptian juice and dissolve it in oil of rose, and place it on the veiled arm with its substance, and then confirm that it is good for him, and use it for him.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And thus it is similar in that action, when there is no arm, Egyptian juice, honey which is cooked until it is thickened, and use it for him; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and sprinkle all over the honey which is on the focus, and then strengthen it over the cloth and hold it over the wound; and strengthen that honey which has been cooked until it is thickened, and sprinkle over the cloth and hold it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And certain clarified remedies are to be administered in the long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and farina of errors and centaury, and use of those simple or adjusted, trituring them and powdering over the honey which has been recommended; and its juice.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the marrow of it, and already there has been inquiry into the bones or other hard members; then you will heal with a fistular cure, just as it has been said below.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	About the cure of gouty hands and worn-out nails and incised fingers and severed sections.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Gouty hands are an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the hand or foot, and it grows in the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less expected, or it is abscessed by a hot cautery, or it is corrupted, and it throws out a bitter humor that corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and it pervades its corruption to the bone within, so that it has a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that water which we have spoken of in the division and it does not comply with your cure, then it is necessary to incise all the superfluous flesh that has grown from the nail and to cauterize the wound properly, because the cautery motion is not helpful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are already comprehending the flesh in the divided parts, and they begin to putrefy and lead to that, then it is necessary to make a subtle incision beneath the angle of the nail that puts flesh, and to impel it upon and incise that flesh to facilitate, and pause on what remains of the flesh of the corrosive medicines that consume until it is totally removed; and properly cure that wound so that it may be healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to incise the bone and extract it, because no time is wasted on healing what is corrupted in the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption are going into the finger, then you incise it in one of the nodes according to the premise of its removal, and properly cure it so that it may be healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has received percussion or attrition, and it is in that vehement pain, then it is necessary to begin by fleubotomizing the affected area, and properly cut the nail with a spatula-like instrument above just, and beware that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the affected painful area, and it will cause the nativity of the superfluous flesh adjusted in that place; and properly cure that place so that it ceases to give pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But that which is adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, is entirely flesh, and it is entirely in the bones, or it is entirely in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the nativity of them in certain nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in certain nodes of the finger does not become evil, and that which is born in the joints is entirely evil.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the cutting is lighter, and it is necessary to incise that from its root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and so beware of its abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born on the fingers from the nodes, it is necessary to incise at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and properly saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for that, and properly cure it so that it may be healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation occurs when it joins the fingers between their moved joints or by nativity of the man who is thus, or by consolidation of the wound or by combustion of fire, or by semblance; therefore it is necessary to cut that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And properly pause between the draps of the swollen fingers in rose oil so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate them from each other, or pause between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in certain fingers at the palm, then you cut that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, they are variable.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are variable, and they are enveloped by gross, full superfluous melancholic humors which come from the members of the body, and the major event of them is in the legs, and mainly in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary to administer purging of the body from black bile with certain clarified remedies for expulsion, and properly bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of iron in the blood is according to two methods: one is that it should be infused and attracted to remove black blood, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all blood should be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it is according to this method: at the beginning, apply a bandage to the leg with warm water until the thick blood is resolved, which is purified by the leg, and then tightly bind the patient's thigh above the knee up to the area below the knee in one, two or three places, and then section the vein at one point, or two, or three points of wide sectioning, and then raise the black blood from the thigh above the area below the leg, and from there downwards, until the quantity of blood that you want is yielded and which has been wasted, and this tolerates the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then leave it there, and order them to abstain from eating black bitter foods that generate choleric humor.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and it is noticed to be beneficial to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of the blood is according to this method: you who raise the patient's leg, if it has many pores, and then put them in a bath and apply a warm bandage to the leg until it becomes red and the veins are extremely full; or it should be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available to you at present, until the member becomes scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the skin on the right of the vein for sectioning in the loin or in the rear of the patient's back, or at the lowest part of the patient's back near the tailbone.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the skin with an incision and scrape the vein from every part until it appears to sensation, and it is evident that the patient's appearance is declining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you evacuate and remove the skin, you will see that white cord which was a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then put it below the vein until it is raised and grafted onto the skin, and suspend it with a hook or iron lion.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section, and then cut that section for three days, and then scrape the skin from the area below the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise it and insert it into the rear section of the back near the tailbone, and then extract it and raise it until it is yielded by the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do it until you extract it from the section that is above or below all the sections, until everything is yielded; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you are not able to extract and raise it, then introduce a strong double-edged needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce the vein below and rotate your hand to every part until it is gathered.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not inserted; for if it is cut, it will be difficult for you to raise it much and it will come back over the patient through that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all the humors are purged, then pause over the place of the open wound with a mixture of vinegar and oil, both rosated and non-rosated, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is opposed and has twisted into the one that is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then be careful to bind above that on every part of twisting of it and the places of envelopment of it, and then suspend it with an incision until it elevates everything.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware of your section that you do not insert the vein and that you do not plague it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; and preserve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incident is what is called a sectional life:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a hook or iron:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to be sharpened thus with hooks or it is not of sharp extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; but it has superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on cold lands, just as in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, which are hot and dry with little tenderness, and in which there are neither herbs nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is generated strongly in other places of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that goes below the skin, just as venomous snakes and worms and scarabs and worms are generated between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the signal of the suspicion of the advent of it is from this vein that causes inflammation vehemently in the leg; and then the place becomes vesicated; and then the vein begins to yield from the place of that vesication which seems to be rooted like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then it appears from there the extremity, then cover that you envelop with a piece of lead weighing as much as a drachm, even to two drachms, and set that aside and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as the eyes of the patient indicate some cause in the affected parts beforehand, wrap that in lead and let that hang.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you inject a portion of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not inject that which is too thick until it is dissolved, for if you inject that it is contradictory and enters into the flesh and causes abscesses and putridity in the area and ulceration badly.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is freed from the back of the patient and no remainder of it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is extracted in some men who are in their longitude of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have reached a point where I extract one of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is injected at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the patient's tract and perforate that long tract in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefying medicine to the area for several days; and afterwards cure that by curing abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And in this vein, some times the joints are stiff, and especially when they appear at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and come to the most horrific orrifics, and it is extracted from some orrific ram.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so cure that in this way as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on generated worms under the skin, and it is called cow's disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land as cow's disease because many times it develops in the oxen and it is a worm that is born between the gut and the flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, weakening and deforming, and it shows the sentiment of the sick animal member by member until it disintegrates the gut and eyes.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing the accumulation of worms and serpents and limbrics and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the liver, then it strongly corrupts the liver and destroys it, and that develops many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you have the suitable ambulation and preparation of the patient's sentiment, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with bandages and strong constriction, and afterwards dry above it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deeply rooted in the flesh and does not come out, then you pause with a cautery iron on the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh in which it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Perhaps sometimes it happens that it reaches the head near the liver, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong stricture, and afterwards dry above it, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use a mondification of the whole body with evacuating medicines for putrid bad humors, and beware of generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on nafir disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is named in our land as nafir, and it is pain that appears in certain members, and afterwards it spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I have seen that according to what I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been numb for an hour, I saw that inflammation going up as it went towards this, but more lightly than it should be, as if it were silver, I saw when it corroded from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I put myself in the pain of that place and fixed myself in the muscle, and afterwards I stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And afterwards I ran to the other body until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And afterwards I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the whole body according to what I saw; and it was too marvelous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And now I had seen nothing like that in my whelps according to that manner, however I have seen many of those which are born with pain being permuted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see that in the whelps as it was in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was that, but rather it was because the woman was old, with dried-up body and discovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that permeated corruption.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it not appear according to this retrogression in those who are delicate and have bodies with humiliated veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you want to cure the patient, and they feel that pain, then it is not apparent to you in what way you should proceed, so you strengthen over that and let it be treated gently and slowly, entering that constricted area, and cauterize the affected spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Perhaps you do not see the hidden ulcers, then you cure that excess in the body and that which expels bad air, and burn those foul-smelling abscesses and those serpents like similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of juices.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Juices are diversified according to species, and according to the places in the body where they flow, because their diversity is that of those with large points, and small, and concave, and rough, so they are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with asters.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the passages in which they flow is according to two manners: because the principal members are concave, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and similar things; and then when you cut into one of these members and appear to sense death, which causes you to recompose properly, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that juice from those in which death sits in the major dispositions, and when you do not appear with those evil senses, and the juice is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the senses of the brain it is when you cut into the juice, and it transgresses the bone, and it is situated on the siphac which is above the brain, because it causes vehement headaches, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and it strongly absconds the speech and destroys the voice, and it is situated on the place of the plague with humid white blisters resembling pustules, and it seems to be affected by the similar flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And then if you appear with those senses, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the juice, unless it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Perhaps the senses of the juice when it cuts into the heart, so that it is near the adjacent breast, and it seems that it is fixed in a hard cause, and not a vain cause; and it strongly affects the movement of the juice, similar to the movement of the pulse, and it corrodes the black plague, and it is that coldness of the extremities, and it freezes the flesh, and syncopes; and then you know that death descends with all its might.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the senses when the juice has infected the lung, so it is beset by bloody spumous matter of the plague, and the veins that are near the colon, and it is muddied the color of the patient's skin, and it expires a great spirit, and demands attraction of cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if you cut into the juice in the veilment which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes a great cry with vehement pain and sighing, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you cut into the juice in the stomach, then it strongly affects the plague with some kind of indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you cut into the juice in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, then it is some kind of wound of the plague, or the web, or hernia which is disordered, and there is no hope in the cure by extraction of the juice.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the juice cuts into the bladder, and it is situated before urine, and it processes some cause at the divided parts before, and it strongly affects pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Perhaps the other members are like the face, the colon, and the gullet, and the splinters and the adjutors, and the spondyles of the back, and the furcula, and the coxa, and the leg and their similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the juice does not encounter a vein or an artery and is not a venomous juice.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recompose that to you which you have seen of the being of these juices, because it signifies for you about the true cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	Which cause is, because in one case the juice flows into the lacrimal duct of the eye from the root of the nose, and you extract it from the other part, leaving the grayish color of the aurelia, and it is healthy, and does not affect the eye with numbness.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And you extract another juice from a Jew who had it in the gray of his eye, behind the eyelid, and the juice was hidden and not obtained from that except a small extremity which adheres to the grayish fist, and it was a great juice among the sharp juices of the Turks, with iron leon in which there were no aurelias.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is healthy, and does not affect his eye with a bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And here is the translation:
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	He extracted another arrow from a man whose belly was dislocated, and he thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since he had not moved for thirty days and no change had occurred in his condition, he examined the arrow again and began to understand its nature, and he recovered, and the bad accident did not happen to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	There was a man in whom an arrow was lodged in his back, and the wound had consolidated over him, and since he had been suffering for seven years, the arrow had taken root in the thigh bone.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	There was a woman in whom an arrow was lodged in her belly, and the wound had consolidated inside her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not experience any discomfort in some of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	There was another man in whom an arrow was lodged in his face and the wound had consolidated, and they removed the arrow, not experiencing much pain, and it seemed almost miraculous.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	He extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And he was called for the treatment of his wound, which was about to be healed within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then he felt the wound of the arrow very slightly; and then he inquired about it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but he sensed it a little below the right shoulder, and then he supposed that this sensation was due to the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he applied a plaster to the place where it was attracting and digestive, trusting in me that the place would be affected by what appeared to me as the place of the arrow, so that it would succeed over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant accident occurred in that place where the arrow had reached; and he continued to apply the plaster over it for many days without any accident; and the wound consolidated meanwhile, and the pain of the extraction subsided within many days until one day I felt the arrow inside my nose and recognized it as mine.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then he paused on the acute corrosive medicinal wound for many days until it was opened, and with a gentle touch, he examined that, and felt the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the thigh.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then he adjusted the application of the wound to that acute medicine until it appeared clearly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I spent my time on that for a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then since the wound was amplified, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I mastered that, and did not obey the usual method, meanwhile I did not cease to subtly engineer and contrive about it in various ways of contraption, until one day I began to use a device with descending forceps, according to the form of those at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then he restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and he restored it and the wound consolidated, and the patient was completely healthy, and there remained no defect in him for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of certain arrows because it pauses that rule and significance about what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the artisans know how to compare little about much; and they are present about what is absent; and they find a new operation and novel instrument that descends from the external causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is gone by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a carnal place, and it is attracted and forgotten.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the essence of the hour at which it is caught, then it happens that you will leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obey its essence, then leave it for some days and try to attract it with motion on any day, and it will be forgotten.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey its essence for some days, then it happens that you will perforate the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the whole part with subtle travel until the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrowhead is fixed in the bone of the head and has proceeded to one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient's symptoms those accidents which you know and say, then abstain from the extraction of the arrowhead and let it be so that it may be equalized by itself over several days; for if the arrowhead passes through the siphac, then death is not prolonged to him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrowhead is not fixed but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the siphac, and the patient remains for several days, and no accidents occur to him from those causes, then you should proceed with the extraction of the arrowhead and with its removal.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps it is not fixed and does not obey your extraction, then you should administer tarwater around the area of the arrowhead as we have recommended, and carefully cure the wound so that it may be healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Perhaps the arrowhead is embedded in the location of the body, and it is embedded in the sentiment, then you should make an attempt to probe that, and if you feel that, then you should use certain instruments which are convenient for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then you should make an incision over the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrowhead.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the instruments which are necessary, then you should cut the flesh in which it is fixed from all parts to the very edge that you may be able to remove; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it becomes obedient.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrowhead in whatever location it is, then you should use a twisting motion with your hand and forceps on all parts until it becomes obedient; and subtly use a subtle subtlety so that the arrowhead is not broken and it is made difficult for you to extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on it at that time, then you should leave it for several days until the parts that are in its vicinity can be purified, and then repeat it because then it will be alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Perhaps you have caused a contrary flow of blood, then you should administer what we have said about cure in the seventh chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And beware of your virtue of insight into veins or nerves, or cords, and administer instruments in all manner possible for the evacuation of the arrowhead; and make it facilitated and tranquil and slow and firm, just as you know and as I have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you should make a counter-incision to remove the arrowhead so that the patient may be according to the figure according to which you have deviated from the judgment of the arrowhead in him, for it is perhaps more just.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Perhaps if that is not possible for you, then you should administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Perhaps the arrowheads that are counter-set by the opposite part, or that have proceeded to some part outside, or have made the extraction of the arrowhead difficult by sentiment of the part above the codeine propounded and sometimes that is eminent; therefore you should section about that; and it should be the section according to the quantity in which they take hold with the forceps; and then you should attempt that, for it is made lighter by experience.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Perhaps if it is retained in the bone, then you should twist the lamina according to counter-pressure until the arrowhead is embedded in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat it until you find success.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the thrust of the arrowhead is in that, then you should impel it with the instrument.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Perhaps if the thrust is fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you should introduce and insert it, if it is dull, instrument concavely so that it enters the cavity of the arrowhead in the hollow of the bone and then impel it with the instrument.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Perhaps if the arrowhead is concave, then you should impel it with a strong instrument entering into that, for the arrowhead is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrowhead is intoxicated, then it is necessary that you concave all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then cure it with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrowhead is caught in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near so that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and beware of insight into veins or nerves, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is indigent, and cure it until it is healthy.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps which are suitable for extracting arrowheads:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	They are the extensions of their ends like a bird's beak which are made with serrations when they take hold of the arrowhead so that it does not escape.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are caused by excessive motions, great, few and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of the small weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of impulse with the concavity of this extremity that conquers also with pain of a wing to prevent the instrument of the arrow from entering it, and an impulse of that sore:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of impulse of a sore extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Also with a ray to prevent the instrument from entering it in the concave arrow, and it is propelled also at that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of the bloodletting of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of bloodletting, which customarily run to be bloodletted thus. of those that are in the head 16. It is two pulsating veins that are near the ears, it is said in the authorities; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are under the lip; and two veins that are above the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and it is two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	More, the veins that are bloodletted in the arms thus. Because of those, one is a cephalic, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and sour, and it's a moderate vein, and it's composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of the whole body", and the basilica is a vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and it's the end of the arm, and it's placed above the elbow, and it's that one which appears above the pulse for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein which is between the auricular finger and the small finger, and so in the two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the knee of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophea, and its place is below the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of the veins that are near the ears is for catarrhal, ancient and migratory and sapiential and ulcerous evils of the bad head, from ancient times.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you recommended to you: it is that the head of the patient be raised, and the head of the patient be rubbed in the occiput at the place of both veins with a gentle touch; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage inside which appears the two veins and their places near the ears in two preeminent places of the head; and if you feel that tie, and if you sense the pulse of those in the tied digit, here it will be tended.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it below the vein in the codeine until the bloodletting comes out to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand on the vein and codeine to the upper parts and incidentally incise the vein in an incidental incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two digits adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen the pulse and let it settle in until it is healthy.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already I have preceded in the commencement of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More, of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the treatment of bloodletting is for ancient and malicious migraines and perpetual and continuous ophthalmia and body of acute overflowing effusions to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what you recommended to you: constrict the patient's seat with a motive inside so that the two veins appear at the sentiment for manifest appearance and demonstrate the pulse of those below the tied digit; and then it will be tended.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the codeine above the vein to the upper parts with the tied digit indicated, and introduce the bloodletting incidentally below, and raise the vein in its place; and incise it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and stop the tied digit on the vein for an hour, and then stop above that cut and pulse and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and let it settle in until it is healthy.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already proceeded the memory of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the commencement of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Thus the youthful treatment of phlebotomy of the vein at the forehead is suitable for phlebotomy of the cephalic to ancient evils of the face and to emigrate and purge fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; so it is that the patient should hold the sieve with a bandage around the arm, and take the instrument which is called a fleam, of which this is the form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause at the prominent point where the fleam is placed on that vein and puncture it with a pen or another instrument in your hand, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and hold it in place until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some evacuated veins are opened in phlebotomy, however it is not known that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, unless it is of a fat extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and fortifies the tendons in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The youthful treatment of the two veins that are also the lachrymals of two eyes for scabbing of the eyes to purge and cleanse them, and at the evils of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should hold the arm with a bandage, and then phlebotomize them, and you stand steady over the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is done the phlebotomy according to the transverse a little at a time with a small phlebotomy, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, it fortifies the tendons of its extremity.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and hold it for one night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The phlebotomy of the vein at the nose is convenient for acute fever and vehement sweat, and at the evils of the face and to emigrate and purge what accumulates on the face, and it is more effective when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient should hold the arm and you place your left hand on the nose, and take the subtle phlebotomy longwise and fix it in the middle spot at the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sense here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You know that you open your hand on the phlebotomy little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it for one night, because it is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The youthful treatment of phlebotomy of the two guidons leads to constriction of the wings and commencement of leprosy and to many evils and impetigo and bad corroding ulcers, thus with herpetromeno.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient should hold them with a ligament on the arm; and there are artificial devices on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein at length with a small phlebotomy little by little; and then extract blood according to temperate quantity or according to what is needed at that time; and then make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the ligament and hold the two veins with a moderate structure so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and let it enter into the morning because the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the youthful treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerich veins, comforts small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and at bad ulcers that are in the nose and in their circle.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit down in front of you, and hold the arm with a bandage, and then revolve the lips of it and regard the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the negation of each of both, and that is why in the circle of those there are small black veins; and then you inscribe each one for an incidental incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt in you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you undertake the incision of the larger of those, and of the most manifest pustule of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it similar to the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to correct and incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The youthful treatment of the two veins that are below the tongue is suitable for phlebotomy of the cephalic to precocious ones that are in the throat, at the evils of the uvula, and at the evils of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flatulence is that which follows the patient between their hands, in front of the sun, and raises their tongue, and looks below their tongue, from one vein on the left and another vein on the right, and the color of each is declining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then flatulence occurs; and beware that you do not ultimately place your hand in flatulence during those, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flatulent in the hollow of the artery, where it usually correlates with all the humors, and the flatulence of theirs is done according to two methods, either by placing the mirtilated or olive oil on subtlety declining; or by evacuating the cutellar flatulence, and applying it to the lessening, and this is their form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this lessening is what convenes to section and of those special veins, subtle and according to the amplitude of the veins and according to their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirtilated flatulence:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of the thus-come-times, and it convenes to open the concave full veins proceeding apparently gross, and to those that contain a great gross turbid.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive flatulence:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flatulence is of lesser latitude and of purer subtle extremity, and it convenes to flatulence of subtle veins that contain a pure subtle citrus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Moreover, the juvament of the flatulence of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts the sap from the bad humors that are below the gullet and the colon, and from that which sieves the chest and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it convenes to the flatulence-doctor, when that flatulence occurs, that he guards well that and is above-trembling in that, for below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flatulence, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of sap, so that it seems that he does not flatulence on that which is a pungent flatulence, unless he is secting with lessening.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear through manifest appearance, then it seems that you should leave that and move to another, or seek some other branch; or that flatulence occurs at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and it will be lessened with flatulence thus as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	Moreover, if you want the flatulence of the thigh, then it seems that within the structure of the arm that touches the place between which you know the place of the pulses, and places a sign above the hand; and places the arm and evacuates the vein in concave section with flatulence thus as we have said; and beware that you do not strike the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you do so, as you stretch the ligament, it swells in the place where you have felt the hand, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the sap flows in the flatulence thus as aurina of an infant, and the sap is subtle rouge, then you know that it is of the sap of the artery; and then you touch and pause the said tieu above for a long space; and place the said tieu, and if the sap is absorbed, because many evacuated sap is absorbed, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And beware of the patient's humor, and be above-trembling of it and do not handle that for some days until it is sanctified.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Moreover, if the sap is not absorbed, and it seems that you do not present medicine to that, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is constricted, and the sap is absorbed; or take a gentle pinch, and finish that, and take one measurement and stretch it above the place of the vein with strict structure and ligament and pulses until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the sap is absorbed, it is good; and if not, then cure that with water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the powdered absorbents to flux of sap.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the absorption of the sap of it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Moreover, of the dark vein, the flatulence is juvament that extracts the sap from the upper part of the head and to the lower part of the body; for it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of cephalica, thus as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it seems that the flatulence-doctor should be above-trembling in the flatulence of it, for below it is a nerve; and then if he adjusts in the puncture of the flatulence and touches the nerve, he will cause stupor to it, and it is difficult to heal it, and far from being sanctified, And this nerve appears many evacuated sentiments; and if it is occulted at some homes and is subtle and does not show, then it seems that you should pause the flatulence in which you flatulence in section of lessening, and avoid the nerve with your forcelessness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you must divide the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The treatment of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to attract the blood from the head and confer relief to the pains of the shoulders.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And take care in this procedure, if you want the phlebotomies to puncture either olive or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, since it neither touches an artery nor a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May the emperor's wisdom guide you in phlebotomy, which guards that the phlebotomy needle does not puncture the tender skin of the lacert as much as possible, and seeks a more yielding spot, and does not harm it, if not assisted by the primary percussion that is above that phlebotomy, some veins having been evacuated.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	May the emperor's strength be apostemated in some men, when they are not phlebotomized by the primary percussion, may they not harm themselves in that aposteme.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	May the quality of the phlebotomy of that and its accidents are so many, in which you should take care to consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health and in hope of its benefit and caution against the occurrence of pains, and that it be done phlebotomy on one of the veins that are in the hollow, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when apparent signs of fullness.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at the first hour after sunrise, once three hours have passed since yesterday.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May phlebotomy that is administered, may it bring convenience and necessity to whom it is given, whether at night or day, in every hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And take care that infants are not phlebotomized until they have fourteen years, and females who are pregnant are not phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and old people are not phlebotomized if they have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for some mania, take care that you purge the stools beforehand with a clyster of Leon, if in those there is retained matter, so that the veins do not attract superfluities in the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And they are not phlebotomized, the patients who have nausea and cramp, nor those who evacuate badly or have a tremble until what is retained is removed from them, nor those with hydropic pain, and may phlebotomy be tempered according to colic passion and according to vomiting, and according to belly pain, and according to multiplication of cough and of trouble and of exercise of fasting or of vigils and of all causes that dissolve virtue, whether it is corporal28 or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider in subtlety of humors beforehand if the blood is gross, with wine and beer, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or is excited by some exercise so that the blood is subtled.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy of it on the feet of the day, that is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perform for you that the foot of that one is guarded on that day from all bad accidents, animals, thus as it is anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, thus as it is trouble and excessive pain and cough and similar to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its session, make sure to present the causes in the use of that which corrects customarily among men with aromatics and odors and balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibilities.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is put above the cushion of the one who must be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And also extract the sick arm, and rub that one with their hand the phlebotomist does twice or three times; and also strengthen the ligament in correction and involve that one twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is a mollification, and then it prohibits the body's blood vessels.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And also the structure, take care that the one who must be phlebotomized rubs their hands together among them so that the veins are inflated, and are declared to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And also the phlebotomist anoints the sick phlebotomy with a little oil antic properly; and also pauses the sick finger of the left hand over that vein, beneath the spot where one wants the phlebotomy, so that the vein becomes a little, and the percussion is seated because among the veins it is the one that touches thus like a fleeing cord gives the phlebotomy, and of those it is full of windiness and when pauses the phlebotomy over that it is constricted thus the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not uncover the vein, and if it uncovers, that is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, it is necessary that the flower-picking surgeon be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then stop the bloodletting, for if a vein is opened in a vessel, then it is good; and if not, you will open another vessel below that place on the arm, or above, if the place is not affected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is affected, or the patient becomes weaker, then you will leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because the strong compression can cause an aposteme, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then perform bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and you subtly feel the blood flowing, and you fear that it will not flow in the quantity that you want, then you perform bloodletting in that tract according to rectitude and adjust the perception a little, and do so with careful attention before the place becomes affected, because the place becomes affected in many homes for a short time with little perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if it has already become affected, then do not touch it, because you cannot attribute any cause to it; and pause on that part of the ulcer of the oil, because it alleviates the body's blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place where the oil is, and that the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer the oil of the ulcer in all bloodletting, in which bloodletting the veins are prohibited from the body's blood, and make a tyrical alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on one of those above the place, because the blood is subtly revolved when it is gross.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of bloodletting a great aposteme is generated, because many vessels are injured, and it worsens for one who has not been bled since that vessel, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you apply, and pause on the place with a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary that you make points on the surface of the blood of that vein in complement to it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you remain on the place for several days with some blackness or viridity, do not notice it; and if you want, pause on that cause of aloen and mirra dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calamint or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many vessels are injured so that apostemes and eminences come from bloodletting of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then stop your hand on that, and if then you apply a soft compress on that, then that eminence is evil and bad; and therefore beware that you pause on that cause of what we have said, because the strong flow of the artery's blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And do the plastering in that place where it is stipulated, so that the place may be hardened, and then heal another wound with another cure until it is healthy.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary that you extract from the blood all men according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color appearing on the blood, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you will leave it until it is red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you will leave it until it is subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acuity of it is stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a vessel, that the bloodletting of the vein be amplified and the bloodletting be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in one who is frail, do the contrary of that, and it is necessary to extract that in many vessels, and that the tract be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the better way to administer bloodletting of a vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of bloodletting is safe from the flow of blood and injury of nerves, and it is more laudable and more safe than bloodletting according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And at that time it is customary to add syncopes of bloodletting, and it is necessary that you cure it beforehand with bloodletting in a small infusion of mild milk or simple oximel scalded; and extract the blood from three vessels or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is complicated by completeness, then take beforehand with bloodletting for infusion in a syrup of mint or in a syrup of mel aromatized with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in an aromatized syrup and very odorous.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if it is injured by syncopes of bloodletting, and it is the cause of much blood issuing, then it is necessary to take in drinking water of carnation and syrup very odorous subtle; and use aromaticity with some galea, and let the sieve foot be in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division of the chapter on syncopes for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if you want to evacuate the serum from the arm and dissolve the second evacuation of blood, it is necessary to make a small incision in the place where phlebotomy is done for moderate evacuation, and the strength of the patient is frail, which evacuates little by little, according to the quantity of strength in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But if you want to evacuate the serum from the arm, and give the second vein, and the body is strong, then do it about 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But if you want to attract the blood from the body to the opposite part of the affected area, it is necessary that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood already inflamed and excited, it is necessary that a great quantity of blood be let out at once and amplified perception occurs before syncope sets in; for you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse of the patient's arm, so that no death occurs in the place of syncope, because many evacuations are made when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not suitable when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is very difficult to extract the blood, that you press with vehemence and curvature, which is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the lancet inside until it is phlebotomized a second time; or remove it with the acidity of the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or place over it a tyrical or sagzenial, and compress it with a gentle pressure until the blood is stopped.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation is calmed.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke evacuation of the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you should make an incision in that place or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in the place of the fork or the basilica, when they are not overgrown or not hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand in warm water until the vein becomes manifest and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it should be tightened over the vein with a moderate ligature; and then phlebotomize according to the small transverse incision, not lateral nor longitudinal.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And it should be a broad perception and your phlebotomy is the one where you phlebotomize over the joint of the hand, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in warm water, and it is customary to pause the flow of blood in warm water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is more salvageable than all the other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the little finger of the right hand is conducive to the illnesses of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, because you have put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly demonstrated to the sight; and then phlebotomize transversely; and if you do not succeed, do not worry about it.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware that you do not ultimately phlebotomize your hand, because then the nerves of the fingers are exposed and stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of need, then you should pause over the vein with oil or salt, so that it is not consolidated too much; and similarly, it is necessary that you do everything in a straight and orderly manner.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that vein on the left hand is that it is conducive to the illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of this vein as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the cephalic vein phlebotomy is for the illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, as well as for the illnesses of the mother, and for retention of menses, and for the illnesses of the kidneys and ulcerations of thighs and old sores, and for their similar illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their foot in warm water and makes friction over that place until the veins appear; and you should make an incision on the joint of the foot with a curved movement; and the place of the vein is apparent from the bottom of the toes, and from there it ramifies on the surface of the foot, which has many ramifications.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore apply a poultice of abundant soft material around the leg, which is swollen and red, because it is better and more soothing.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you apply a poultice on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath the surface of the foot, and pause your poulticing there, where you are applying it across, lest you wish to cause an injury.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the poultice be gentle.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if it is prohibited to stop the flow of blood; then you should immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow out, so that it may be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the poultice-maker erred in the first dressing, then remove the poultice from one place, because the area is salty; and do not fear the evil magic, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make a poultice on the opposite foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the area is as we have said, namely beneath the heel near the Silvester's joint.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the juice of the poultice of it is good for pain when it is due to blood cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the poultice of it is that the patient enters in a bath, and binds and strengthens the thigh of the injured leg underneath the heel, beneath four fingers in a long subtle bandage, so that it does not appear except for that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you apply the poultice according to each engine that is possible for you and according to the traverse, and it is better; or you insert it for insertion or you suck it out for suction, because the area of it is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many homes greatly feared; and if you touch it, and it does not appear to the whole sentiment, then apply some soft material of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot, near the auricular and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the structure and pause over the area of the poultice, and strengthen the area, because the loosening is healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	About ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilations are of horns, or of iron, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two manners, because one is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 13 places of the body, among which one is where the nocturnal ventilations are paused, and it is the last part of the head; and the thousandth place is in two parts of the neck together; and ventilations of the chin beneath the jawbone beneath the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is on the end of the hip; and ventilations of two foci, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small sparse veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not capture the virtue through those, just as it is captured by poulticing; nor does it cover that ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any illness made for replenishment until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for illness or for continuity, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time it is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that the humors are in those places where the blood is multiplied until it induces extraction of it through ventilation and touches the dry head, grave and solid; and from those it touches replenishment and rigor in their face and on their head, and on their neck; and from those it touches progress in their face and on their forehead, darkness and faintness in their eyes; and from those that change the place of their ventilation; and from those it is that their flow is multiplied; and from those it touches pleasure of blood in their mouth, or that the tongue is apostemed and spits out blood; and from those it is that their sleep is multiplied, and from those that see blood in their sleep, rigor and antics and plagues and other causes similar to those.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens for any of those causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle of the month, then I command that ventilation should be done more than two or three hours after dawn.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilation of the nuca is that when it confers gravity on the head and adds to what is found in the eyes; but I think that it should be near evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the place of poulticing of the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not lawful to use that of him who is of complete fragility, or in which there is a flow, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not suitable to use those veins, and in the heads of those which are badly affected by fragile parts.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to him who is continuously suffering over that, it is caused by forgetfulness; and therefore it is suitable that you command the apothecary to place his hand a little above the affected parts below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The apothecary's ventilation is in the place of fleubotomia of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and to the constriction of the wing and to the scission of the instrument of the wing, and to all, and to repetition.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is suitable that the apothecary's ventilation be impelled a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the apothecary's ventilation of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, and emigration, and prefocation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomia of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is suitable that you command the apothecary not to press his hand on scarification so that he does not incise the artery and accelerate fluxes of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the apothecary's ventilation below the mouth confers to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to resemblance to those bad things that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomia of aliheric which is in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the apothecary's ventilation that is made on both spatulas confers to captivation, which is made for repetition of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the apothecary's ventilation of both divided parts of the focus confers juvenation of the fleubotomia of three veins, thus it is of the basilica, dark and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those veins plus manifold that are in the flesh, and those manifold veins from the other gross veins until they pervade the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the apothecary that he should not proceed too much in scarification, because the place is deprived of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation with which one ventilates over the hips and confers to the hemorrhoids of the buttock and to the ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is suitable that you command the apothecary to make a great ventilation, and that it be of iron, because the place induces strong dryness; and strongly they are traumatized by subtle ventilations and it should be scarified in scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But ventilations of the smaller limbs are diminished for manifest diminution, because they attract the blood from all the body, and confers to ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confers to bothor and ademil; and it is in the place of fleubotomia of two siphons, and alahorcoben, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, I will not belittle the entire body and cause syncopy in many places.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the ventilations of alahorcoben, the juvenation is propelled to the juvenation of the ventilations of both limbs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventilations is that it pauses the ventilation at the beginning of the vein and sucks for temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the ventilations, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains with those quietly, and that the humors come to the place for adventitious ingenuity.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already enraged and inflated and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who is of tender flesh and rare pores, it is suitable that you scarify him once a week and no more, so that the place may not be ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the apothecary to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction to facilitate.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is gross, then it is suitable to scarify twice a week, because in the first week it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and to its aquosity.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second (week) to the perscrutation acquired from the extraction of the gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very filthy, then it is suitable to make a third scarification for that it cleans the worse.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gradually, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract much blood, we shall make many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is gross, then it is suitable to scarify by deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which lies the depth of the ulcer so only then.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the ulcer is large, hard, dark, and the veins are very constricted, it is because the places of the ventoses are not tender, but rather resolved; if it is in summer time, thus with oil of lavender or violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter time, then with oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of sanic, and to those that seem alike.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, fresh, then the oil should be of marjoram, or of balsamic, or of lavender, or of anise, and to those that seem alike.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	Perhaps if the ventoser is of ample pores to tender flesh, then it is prohibited from oil, and it is seen that the places of ventoses are washed with lukewarm water or fresh water of solatrum, or water of chamomile, or water of bordolaguas, and similarly to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that of which the wound is of much humidity, wash its ventoses with agreeable wine, or water of myrt and sumac and similarly to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that which the excesses are large, wash its ventoses with old wine, or water of sanseco, which is majorana, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to those that seem alike.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is seen that the ventosation should be kept at a distance from steam; having seen that it should be administered close to the steam of the bath for an hour or two, and it is seen that it sleeps close to the ventosation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that should be governed so that the ventosed one is released from phlebotomy before ventosation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is seen that you consider the commencement: then if the ventoser or he who should be phlebotomized is choleric and vents about the wound with agitation and inflammation, then it is seen that it takes causes of cooling, thus with milky acetoses, and endivia in an agreeable wine, and sacanabin, and julep, and to those that seem alike.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause at their windows thus with poultices, and flesh of auricular spongy parts, and windows constricted with gruel, and to those that seem alike.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that which the complexion is fresh, it is seen that it takes in drinking essence of ivory, or essence of auricular saponaceous parts of semensas, and sumac, and there is much odorant mirth between viel and noel; and that it is commanded to use little drink and to eat, and pause at the windows of its poultices and canabir and pissers and small auricular spongy parts and columbat.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is seen that on the day of ventosation and phlebotomy, the drink should be more than the window.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is seen that it should be given in drink at certain hours to certain homes tyriaca alpharac, or medications of musk, so it is musked, or alcilite near the ventosation or near phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and the wound is subtle; and it is not seen that they take that scalpel.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Perhaps the ventoses that are scarified are ventoses that are paused on the feet, and above the ankle and gout, and above the navel, in the places of the joints, and the inflammation of the anch; because these members do not suffer from scarification over themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those except attraction of wound of member, thus with paused ventosation on the mamilha in malady of flux of wound of the wounds of the nars; and use of that so that the fresh ventosity is dissolved, inviscated from the member, thus with paused on the belly and the navel; because that rarefies the member and scales it and removes the pain since resolves ventosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already it is paused on the knees when they accumulate in their opacity or pus, because for virtue of strong attraction the humble opacity is fortified and eradicates the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it is done when it is paused on the feet and ankle, thus ventosity is enclosed in those enclosures.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventoses are administered with juice only then; and some vegetables are administered at the fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vegetables are administered full of water of tea in the maladies of the ankle.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the ventosation should be filled and should be more grand, thus it is hot water alone or water in which there are cooked herbs for that convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of ventosation administered at the fire: it is the amplitude of the orifice of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice should be the size of a palm; and it is in the latz of lu, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of lu, the tube is small according to the quantity that enters into lu with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is necessary to make a circular motion with the hand, of large massage strokes, with the elbow, and with fingers in order to not displace the member from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And make a gentle sweep of the hand or of iron, placing a candle flame at the focus.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this is the great remedy that we have recommended; and the small pause of that according to the illnesses and the state of he who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses of the old people are extended to others, that is, the cupping glasses of the young and of large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this cupping glass to the focus on the member is that it extends the flame decently and gently in a small candle of wax, and places it above the transverse vein at the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the trajectory that we have said, until when we hold the cupping glasses and do not intend to open the finger and let the vapor escape over that trajectory, then the cupping glass will be almost dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And adjust the flame according to its manner, and remove it if you sense that it is indigestible to him.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	There is a cupping glass that is administered in the case of flatulence, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or trajectory, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member just so.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: This cupping glass, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 148.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-sucking cups are not administered on most members except on those in which it is not possible to place cupping glasses, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum, and similar to them; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose, and similarly.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found blood-sucking cups that are on the stagnant waters of muddy places.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are left in the stagnant water during the day and night until they become famished, and no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated through flebotomy and cupping glasses; and then the member of the patient is cleansed until it becomes red; and then they are placed above it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and fallen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the matter from the place of the cupping glass, it is more desirable in juvament (treatment).
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the place with vinegar and then with much water; and it should be cleansed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the wound is prolonged by the removal of blood-sucking cups, and it is that which remains, then you put a cloth of linen in cold water, and place it above until the suppuration is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the wound is multiplying, then powder it with vitriol thrice, or gall and similar to them among the stiptic causes, until the wound is abscessed; or place on the spot the mastics of excocicated beans, and leave them until the beans adhere to the spot, and the wound is abscessed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of blood-sucking cups, when it is possible to move them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood-sucking cups are prohibited from suspension, then cleanse the spot of recent wound or place a needle in the spots until the wound scabs; and then they are placed, for they sense some wound that is almost adhered.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, powder over them a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or ash, and it will happen almost immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that I have thrown out of this chapter the foolish doctors and the vulgar ones who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I do not have it and obliated anything from it at any time; and no one has habituated to it afterwards, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding, until they extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I direct my effort and study to the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experience; since here I abbreviate it for you others and deliver it from occupation of elongation; and I abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it in many forms of the instruments that are administered there, as it is done by addition of declaration, thus I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from being broken bones, which of them a necessary prior permission is, before we start remembering the fractured members and diverse ones.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	It is fitting then that I should define the summaries of this sermon in the prohemium of this chapter; and the chapters for understanding those which from the beginning are established by the artisans and a station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are so prompt to know or learn this noble art other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And then I say that when accidents occur from a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing, then it is fitting that you should hasten to the beginning of phlebotomy or alleviate that, or whatever symptoms, if no cause prohibits it, thus with debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs often, or in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And it is fitting to be content with a diet of fresh herbs and lean meats of birds and game, and to prohibit gross meats and to fill up on diets and all diets that fill the veins of blood, until you are secure from apostema caution, and if you do not have fear of effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their first regimen as it was customary for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is fitting that the patient should be nourished with nutritious diets of moderate and light food in which there is viscosity, thus as if their diets were made from wheat flour, and rice, and vegetables, and fish, and cattle stomachs, and newts, and fresh fruits, and gross and similar foods to those, and at this regimen it makes a coagulation of the fracture pus more easily and milder.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the broken bones when they are in the old men who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit ones, it is not possible that they can continue and consolidate according to their nature through the desiccation of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time through the desiccation of those limbs, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs at the end of the lenity, thus as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature's power adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause like glue in which it is grossly stated that it adheres and strengthens until they are conglutinated and united, until they come to the end of fortification and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from their own works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the diets of the patient, diets in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, thus as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Variety of fracture according to variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have come to a remembrance of all species of fracture, explained in the following chapter, distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Variety of fracture in itself is measured.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their meteyssas; because there is a curved fracture other than that which occurs in the stars; and some veins are made into a fracture according to the length of the bone: and thus the fractures of the sagitta and astelhas and additio proceeding and not-proceeding, thus as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a fracture with small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to all species is given or torment proper in restoration of it according to that which will come to remembrance of it distinctly in the following places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is twistedness of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and thus of it when it comprises that with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when it is not in the place of apparent twistedness nor is it felt by the finger touching when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is twistedness or small fissure, therefore you should not touch it with your hand and make compression of all; pause on it for the medicines of which you have remembrance at that moment, which convenes to the place; and then it is straight for subtle structure.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the place where it is curved and not separated into two or other than that which does not occur in the sagitta, thus as it is remembered all part of its comparison, then it is fitting to begin from your hour to rectification of it, since it has apostema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has apostema caution, then let it be for some days until the apostema ceases; and then you should lift it according to whatever manual method you can use for lifting and generating.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You know that restoration of it and agility of it are less than the bone in which it is accustomed to reside.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second wind that will bring back the memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	Sometimes in the bone there are stagnations, then it is necessary to extend this torn member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or have your hand if the member is small; or have two cords or have a cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And it is your position in which you hold the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the torn member are returned, then you will perform that they return to their place and according to each manual art that you can do in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware that you do not fall over the patient during your operation, nor cause any harm; and perform according to your gentle power that you apply one bone to another as their best companions, according to their better forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is convenient that at that hour you touch with your hand, and if sometimes here there is some diverse cause, rectify it and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as many foolish doctors who make vain gestures do, which makes them precipitate caution in their operation, or make them contradict in the member, just as we have seen through the operation of their vain gestures.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, then equate and decent operation and structure of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about it and make them avoid moving it during their vigils and sleep, and see its revolution and agitation, and deprive its ejection, and deprive all its movements with all its virtue; and beware that the position of the member is a position in which the pain is assured, which cause is because it is sent in the disposition of the position of the member or lesion; then it is convenient to permute it to another disposition in which it does not feel pain; and take care that the position of it is direct and equal, so that the member does not fall into tortuousness when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because you know that torn members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small such as the arm and the finger and the vein and similar to those, then it is convenient that the envelopment be with very subtle wrapping.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Sometimes those that are large such as the hip or the leg, it is convenient that in those there be a hard and durable envelopment, because the hard bond connects the great member and strengthens it entirely in equal structure, so that in it there is no macula.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, then your evacuation of equality, pause the convenient ligament according to that, on the place of that fracture with three envelopments or four according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand a little in the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see that it is on the superior part above the place of the fracture, and strengthen less so that you do not force your structure on the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate yourself in the envelopment of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure bit by bit, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and envelop that other wounded part over the torn place in envelopment, and then see that the envelopments are on the superior part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the envelopment and in softening of it according to what we have said in the primary envelopment from above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the turns of a wrapping or cloth on which the tortuousness of the fracture is equalized, if there is tortuousness in it; and otherwise, do not pause in it for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then equalize over these envelopments decently made as much as possible, if in the place there is no inflammation or apostema caution, and then pause on it that settles the apostema and stops the inflammation; and lay it aside for some days; and then you strengthen over the stalks.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And these stalks are of the majesty of a reed cane, and be formed saviently; or they are of fir wood; or of palm branches; and it is the width of each stalk according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is convenient that the stalk which is paused over that fracture be thicker and longer a little than the other stalks, and the length of the stalk according to what is legitimated to the member in greatness and smallness; and then strengthen over the stalks with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then tie from below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is more elongated from the fracture, it mends the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	It seems that the heart is making the veins larger in thickness and subtlety, and it is from the vein's own power; if the veins are too large, thus you have seen through the operation of certain foolish doctors who loosen the cords of the twisted vein, and it is a great error, when the strict structure is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	The subtle veins are not so convenient, because you do not constrict them for the strict structure that is there, and it does not seem that between this and this there is less of a digit.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the stars to the strict structure in those places, then pause and stop the flow of the lion's or lanolin-enriched ointment entering there so that it does not make a lesion.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some bruised fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find a remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that not all broken members are straight on the first day; the cause is that the member, when it is large, does not seem to pause over the stars for seven or eight days, according to your secure advancement of caution against aposteme.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the implanters among whom the Ancients restored, who were skilled in setting bones back in place after fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of implanting as a help for restoration of fracture, convenient for complex and major injuries to the veins and to the efflux, because it is about that which neither heat nor cold reaches: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you trust that thus it is, but that you remove the crust from the white of the egg, and pause the complexation of the non-expansive and subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manual of implanting fractures and dislocations: recipe for assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is made from a thousand grains of salvaged millet, each drachm; of myrrh and aloes, one drachm; alochil, two drachms; all are ground and mixed with water or album of Huou, if the complexity of the patient's injury is scalded; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones effectively, and confers a great remedy.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manual of implanting which confers on a fracture and dislocation: recipe migrach and metal of white alta, one drachm; of myrrh and aloes, one drachm five; of acacia, six drachms; of Armenian boil, two drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All three are ground in a mortar with a very strong contraction, and all are crushed, and all are mixed with water or egg white and it is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of implanting for joints and separated bones in their places, and then sudden pain occurs in those and fissures and fractures: take a lane poultice and submerge it in warm oil and cook it and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this implanting there is no virtue of restoration, of cautious aposteme and expelling pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of implanting that restores broken bones: take poultices of fig tree sort and poultices of salvaging poppy; mix all together and make an implanting of it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of implanting abbreviated for administration gives restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remnants of aposteme: recipe roots of altitude, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of peas, of all one part. all three are ground and all are mixed with wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is scalded, then you trust that with water of sweet colander humid or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of implanting that is strong in resolution, which this first one does, when it causes aposteme hard until the restoration of the member: recipe of roots of altitude and of seeds of the iliac, and of balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all one part; all three are ground and all are mixed with water of sage or water of dew or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	More, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it is placed over the broken member until its restoration, unless a wax figure is made of wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it be more subtle between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Most of Galen's writings are visible because they placed emphasis on the restoration of the broken member and the causes in which it becomes dry with little warmth, thus similarly to wonder, they seem and resemble those causes that we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Many remedies for plastering that comfort the lesion and pain: take honey, from ceses, from skins of inscized men or punishment of auzel, and of altaea, and salt, divided into equal parts; they are trissated and cribellated and they make a good plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount according to which one covers the lesion and then it is dislocated, is that you consider if there has been no pain nor inflammation nor the bone is broken nor moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it happens at the place of strong pain or inflammation or swelling, then you touch or anoint it at that hour, and remove its plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth of linen and a humid marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the inflammation and pain are calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place on it a lane sutza submerged in warm oil or rosat oil, and leave it on for nine nights until you are certain of apostema cure, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle structure and small plaster, not too strong for your primary constriction, and subtly soften it until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the apostema and roughness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are thus entirely removed, and you have indicted for plaster and structure, then you apply it thus as you had begun with gentle engagement.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of those causes affect the member that we have mentioned, then you do not delay it except for three days or four or five. and some remedies altogether are left on for twenty days according to how it appears for the dislocation of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and assist in the thickening of the patient's vein, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Most of the time, if you discover the place of the fracture is dry and thin more than it should be, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from penetrating to that; and therefore embrocate it with warm water from all remedies that are applied to it; and let it be thus for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and by this operation correct the member's nourishment, and it is healthily restored.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	Most of the time, that which makes foolish restorers of a fracture of a member another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to what is suitable, and it is restored according to twisting, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a director who aggravated the Antics in their free books and obtained work in that.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen up to some of them who do thus far, because it is more reasonable that they do not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of fracture when it affects the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by percussion of a space, and the percussion breaks all the bone into the ciphac, which is behind the bone, thus as it happens in the fust, and for this reason this species is named ascial; or the space incises some part of the bone, and incises the flesh of it and does not pass the incision to the back of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and its cause is percussion with poverty or falling upon stone, and it resembles them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that already approaches the panniculus which is behind the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason it is named this species of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made or by falling or by percussion of stone and it resembles them, which makes enter some lamina of the bone into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave place thus as it happens to the roles of eram when they happen to their percussion and it is divided into the entering parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is mainly made in the bodies of human bones, thus as it happens to the heads of elephants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And so all these species of fractures are classified, so they are weighed thus as stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find a remedy for all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I will examine all these species of fractures for detection on those and for inquiry into their tendons and ostement of corrupted flesh that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The species of hair-like fibers is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleansed, and anointed with liniment on their tendons, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the cure of fractures, consider at the commencement the accidents of the patient, and then if you perceive through the accidents that signify manifest signs over fear, thus as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of votes, and syncope, and acute fever, and effacement of the veins and rigor of those, and semblance to their accidents in the major dispositions, these do not depart from sanity.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you perceive non-concurrent accidents you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has come to you the plague at the beginning as it is a plague and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the ostement of the bone within the 14th day according to total disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is below the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is among divided and atrophied parts, then it is necessary that you cut the divided and atrophied part, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manner possible to you, according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to make the detection of the bone, either blood flow or apostemic heat, then you oppose yourself to what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place of drizzling infusions in wine and oil, and make the plague repose until the apostema is sedated, and be sure of blood flow; and then begin with the circulation of the bone and its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that will be according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you cut the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision like this, a little wider later than that; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more incisions wider than the preceding one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have different names of various incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and are of iron or felt.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them to facilitate percussion on the incision so that it does not touch the head and lead to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary that you perforate in its circuit within while you administer the incisions with the taravelles, which are called non-deep taravelles.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And it is not so named thus except that those do not reach the term of the bone to what is near it, so that the taravel is rounded extremity or margin above that which is below the head of the agut, resembling a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the narrowness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these taravels in great number, which almost converge to the narrowness of each bone, until it is present to you in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of narrowness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of taravels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the taravel over the bone and revolves around it with the ties until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permits the taravel to another place, and pauses what is between all the tracts the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environs that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with incisions what is between each tract of the bone, and make it more subtle that you can put on it in the end of levitation, thus as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or hold your hand, or hold some other cause for some sturments which will apparel to that, thus as you have talons and forceps subtle.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you keep with total caution so that the incision does not touch any cause of the cifac.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when you have circuited the perforated bone, and it is separated from the cifac if it is continued in it, and you have extracted that, it is necessary that you make equal and engulfs that in the asperity of it from what is in the bone with another sturment similar to an incision, but more imperious than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find some small bones broken and crushed, then take that which is facilitating the instrument for removing the excess; and afterwards cure the wound with liniments and oils that they have applied.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another manner of operation is to scrape, far from pain, which Galen and the wise men have written about in great detail; and this is their sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the broken bone in the part where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that broken bone and have placed it below the extremity of this instrument, slow and gentle, which is the form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	It is that the blunt break is gentle and does not cause any harm, and the acute break is from two lines before in length, thus sometimes; that the blunt break should be adjusted to the ciphac on the face of the acute break in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then percussion is made on the instrument of a break with a small hammer until the entire bone is facilitated thus it revolves, and you should be careful of the bandage that does not touch the accident in any way, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their lore; certainly, and if it was dormant.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When you find some additional cause attached to the bone of the bandage in certain places of the bone, you will cut away that part with the extremity of the instrument, and deliver it from being facilitated, because it is delivered from its pain and its suffering.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the bandage, and that which is cut off or removed from the bone is its surface, and you find it in its roughness and subtle breaks, then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and eradicate those subtle breaks with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it may be possible to administer them at every convenient place according to their need and the most direct way of eradicating the broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary to administer in your razion where you scrape the bone at the beginning with the most subtle of those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease far from that according to continuity until you reach administering the entire tone and the entire subtlety of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Also in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what you have lost in order to reach rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that has not been diminished regarding all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have written above what we have shown about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is retracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosated oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rosated oil and place it over the primary cloth and do so that you may soothe it as much as possible, which does not irritate the ciphac; and then administer on that liament later, and do not stretch it unless for the quantity that the wound has so solely.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that in this care for a day or two until you are sure of the apostema's caution; and then dislodge it and administer medicines as those which are superfluous dryness, thus with liniment of wine and flour of errs, and powder of senses and aristology, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these powdered medicines that they be powdered over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property of which it is that they clean and do not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and it should not be in the surdity of bad humor nor another; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted over the bandage of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with that malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls upon the ciphac of the head, as if the bone is mondified and majorly when the cure of it is impressed, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with the accidents that we have said, knowing that they are parnicious in all their aspects.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not fall black but from the medicine that is placed above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then it is necessary to take honey from one party and rosated oil parties three. and in those lines a cloth, and then place it over the ciphac; and then cure it with the species of cure that converge until it is sanctified.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that the nose is not broken except for two parties together, sometimes above, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not fall to it unless with attrition and tortuosity and sinuousness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two broken parts is torn away, then it is necessary that you introduce the small finger into the wound, and that you reduce the fracture by bending it towards its natural shape, and with the small finger you feel beforehand, until it returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	It should be done for your ease, and beware that you do not fall into that pitfall during your operation on the patient's abdomen.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper broken part of the nose, and it does not appear there, then it is necessary that you equalize with the extremity of the rule on which the small protuberance grows.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make them resemble each other.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then place the sixth or seventh day in rest after the apostema's caution.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth dipped in them, if the fracture is in one part, or two small calques, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be in the large calque as much as is needed to fill the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus some of the ancient restorers claimed that the calques were infused in broth, and were macerated for a whole day, but it was not seen by me; however, it is necessary that the piece be infused in album of egg white comforted with powder of millet; and then lay the calque until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some vegetables are introduced into the nose, in place of a calque, almost like a hen's egg that is wrapped in cloth dipped in lion's milk; and it should be that you already have the fracture of the nose strongly and that the patient is not prohibited from inhaling.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do calques.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another apostema's caution occurs, apply the nose with wax or sewn in a vase of oil and rose oil, or with diacles.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If another apostema's caution does not occur, then it is necessary that you prepare it beforehand with flour of Sizami and powder of crushed hoof in egg white album; and then pause on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken into small fragments or so comminuted, then it is necessary that you separate them from each other, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for them; and then close the suture, and cure it in a way that encarnates and consolidates, and apply a plaster convenient to it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is a festering wound on the nose, then it is necessary that you cure it with calques and administer poultices of lead until it is completely healthy.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not infected, consider then if the fracture is only slightly dislocated, and not broken into two and curved towards the inner parts, then its cognition is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you introduce the small finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the small finger of your right hand; and impel it in that way to facilitate the reduction of the inner fracture, with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; and thus you will equilibrate the fracture.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, then it is necessary that you administer extension of the two parts according to rectitude until it is possible to equalize them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those with which you expect to remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then pause on the broken jawbone wax, and pause on the duplicated cloth, and pause on the large star-shaped decent cloth, or a piece of sole leather along the length of the jaw; and then tie it underneath according to how you have prepared the binding of it and that convenes the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and tranquilize, and pause the food of his swollen lips.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you expect that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then you take it out and dissolve it on the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and apply a plaster with powder of millet, egg white album, or flour of Sizami, since you will have removed the wax of it, and pause on the plastered lion.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then how the annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it thus, so that it does not dissolve until it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; because many vegetables are needed for this fracture to be strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another affected area is seen, then administer what we have said in the treatment of their interior so that it may be healthy, and may remove that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a painful plague, then consider whether it is a separated or displaced bone, then you subtly examine whether those displacements are what is convenient for the removal of those instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the plague is narrow, then you amplify it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have finally removed those displacements, and none will remain there, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, pause on one of the instruments that are convenient for this and encrust it, until it may be healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is injured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many treatments are broken the furcula of the affected part before the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch displacements; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that it touches displacements, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a painful plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a painful plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and secures the broken furcula, and the other extends the vein to that affected part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then adjust the fracture with the tightness of the ties until it takes the shape of it according to its convexity, and it is not in a prominent position or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place underneath the patient's mattress a spatula of cloth or wool, and its greatness according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the furcula and shorten the spatula with your hand until it adjusts the fracture according to its convexity.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the extremity of the furcula to the affected parts before, because it is perverted to the chest, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place on the muscle of one thigh a larger cushion.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of it to the affected parts underneath so that the bone of the furcula is elevated as it is in the chest, and then you straighten the fracture and adjust it with the tightness of the ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	Moreover, if you feel displacements of the furcula and it is mauled, then it is necessary that you bend over it and extract those displacements to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the instruments that have been prepared for this, because you had placed underneath the furcula the instrument that serves the siphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron from which this is its form.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon from which this is its concavity; and its width is according to what you have needed of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Moreover, the length of it is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that there are two extremities also at times, and one extremity is wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague that you have incised when you have extracted the displacement of the bone is wide, and yet secure from abscess caution, then you adjust the two lips of the plague with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess caution, then you fill the plague with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the incision of the plague.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you suspect abscess caution, then you put a warm dressing on it, with oil of roses and wine, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	Moreover, the structure of the bone when it is a plague and it is sectioned, is that you place an emplaster made of flour of millet in album of egg, and place it over the stoppage of the lion, and then place the spatula underneath the mattress of it, if you need it, and then take humectation, so it is torqued which I hold with the Sarrazis, that it may be very long, and its width is one palm or around that; and then place duplicated powders over the stoppage and emplaster; and then take a subtle table stake whose width is three fingers and similarly in length; and then envelop that in a dressing, and envelop that dressing with the stake on the site above the site of the fracture; and then place humectation thus as it is revolved, and revolve that over the neck of it and underneath the mattress of it and underneath the mattress of its patient, and reduce that over the entire affected part, and when the structure of the fracture becomes a descending structure, and it is that which is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And you should not be afraid to put the star-shaped bandage over the broken bone; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, because when the ligament is softened or the star-shaped bandage is removed, then you rectify it and strengthen the joint.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then stop the patient's sleep on their neck, and stop the tiny cushion under them from sleeping at night in a small space; so that it is elevated, the helper of theirs from the side of that, and thus the fracture of the ribcage is elevated by the muscle; or the arm of theirs is tied to the neck of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless it becomes inflamed at the site of the injury or abscess, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of theirs up to that point, and adjust it in the structure and restore it so that it is restored and the fracture of the ribcage is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some gentle remedies are made in some homes that are done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in the broad part of theirs and it does not break unless at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when the part of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of theirs — and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you will prepare theirs and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way to make it as possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then stop on the dusty place of many alum and stop the lion; and then stop powdered drap duplicated; and then stop on the star-shaped bandage of subtle table according to the quantity of the whole shoulder blade or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Perhaps if the star-shaped bandage is concave in some of the places of the shoulder blade, then you will fill that concavity with stoppers, and then push the star-shaped bandage according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it below with a long human chain against downward constriction and fasten the star-shaped bandage until it is not removed from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all gentle remedies that it is softened, another gentle remedy strengthens it and equalizes the star-shaped bandage if it is removed from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lift the patient over their own side there.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the shoulder blade is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this number is complete, then you will dissolve the ligament, and you will know for certain that it is one of the bones which from the beginning was not bruised nor dissolved.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed with the place of the bone's step and put there the splint, then you will bind over it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the ribcage from sadness of abscess, beware that it does not become inflamed here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a foot fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, some gentle remedies are broken in the middle part of it and that ends there; perhaps the extremities of its motion end there, which are weakened and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And from the accidents of it when its middle is broken, it declines to the divided parts and becomes inflamed with great pain, and difficulty in walking, and weakness, and faintness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be resupinated on their own back, and stopped between the shoulder blades with a cushion; and then pressed into the muscles of theirs, and adjusted the ribs of theirs with two rib-ends, and subtly operated on it in the operation and in the equalization according to every way that is possible and that converges to it, until the shape of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then stop on the plaster and stop and stop above the star-shaped bandage of subtle table of gypsum or of chalk and of its similar levitation, since you will envelop that in drap; and then subtly operate on that above the broken bone so it is not loosened; and go with the joint according to retonditat on the back with some gentle remedies, and strengthen that with downward constriction; and then consider the joint at every hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, provoke the dislocation of that from corrosion or putrefaction, or pain, or abscess that becomes inflamed in the place, then you will cut and dissect that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what becomes inflamed for it in every way of cure; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is against that face; and adjust to its constriction until it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that fracture of the ribs does not happen unless in gross places that follow the back; and from the extremities of their departure, they do not become inflamed unless for that reason which is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The knowledge of it is not concealed from the feeling that gives insight into the inquiry of the patient's words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done in such a way that it envelops the fracture of the words according to the possible manner, until it is enveloped as it convalesces, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if it is necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal parts, then it gives rise to vehement pain and puncture, just as puncture that gives rise to one who has suffered a fall, and for this reason the bone puts forth swelling; and it gives rise to difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Antics are skillfully employed in that which has many skilled hands.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of theirs, thus they say: it is necessary to pause the windings of the patient that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture may be pushed towards the fore parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We have avoided that so it may not cause the gathering of bad humors, lest it generates a severe abscess; and if it has already gathered, then it helps towards that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they discovered some of theirs who had paused beneath the windows and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, but I, the emperor, am afraid that the wind will attract the excesses to the place of debility.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they discovered some of theirs: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and then pause powders between the ribs until it is filled, so that it may be the binding that envelops it according to the art; and then the patient should be cured with a cure of poultices of wind and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes vehement constriction of the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth swelling with puncture in the finger, I think about the patient, then it is necessary to bend over the place, uncover the broken rib, and then pause above that instrument that preserves the cipher, the remembrance of which precedes, and that inserts the bone with facility, and extracts that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a binding, and heal it with plasters until it is healthy.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it gathers internally to form an abscess, then you should apply a cushion and pour powders into hot rose oil and pause over the place, and that the patient should be cured with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be raised above the mattress on which one sleeps, until it is healthy.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine, ribs, and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some have seen that fractures of the neck bones are similar to those of the spine, and likewise they attribute it to their artifice, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And with this they gather to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider, because many times the sick ones are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those and when they constrict those with the strings of words or pierce those with a needle and do not feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healthy, and among the same dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if it moves those and feels in those constrictions with the words and puncture, then you know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with a cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to this and want to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider its weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that it is already mollified, it gathers to those who have fallen into the same, and then when you sit on the sick back, you feel windiness and egestation according to its will, and some have seen that it is raised above the sick back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not trouble yourself with its cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	We have seen that no cause of those gathers, the cause is worse and purer evil.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure of it is that you perform a sedation of the abscess with hot rose oil poured over the affected spine, or with mugwort roots of huile; pause on that for some seen days until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then pause with one of the comforting and exiting plasters, and strengthen it with a lien on that; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected part where it hurts until it is healthy.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it gathers from the artifice of the satiating bones or some cause that has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to suck on the codeine and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then heal it with an encarnation of the enguentz, until it is healthy.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	We have seen that the rear of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the coeta, then it is necessary that you enter the finger of your left hand into the back, and envelop the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for secondary equilibrium; and then pause on it with a plaster and astelha, if it is necessary for those, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel stagnant humors in the patient, then put your finger on that area, and apply heat to it, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the narrow passage.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrow passages are so fragile, and if they break, then the fracture is only communicated to the extremities of those and are hidden in their length and decline towards the divided parts; and it adds to the bad pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until it is on the fracture which is its figure.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you bandage it according to how it appears to you by equalizing the bandage until it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Moreover if the fracture is in the groin or it declines towards the lower parts, then you make a soft bed on the patient's belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have bandaged it, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or of cane over it, and tighten it with a strict compression so that there is no puncture of the fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And bandage the concavity so that it fills it until it takes the compression according to equality, and order the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Moreover if an abscess forms cautiously, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is settled cautiously, and place over it what settles according to what precedes; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen it thus as a covering.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if they are stagnant humors in the bones or they are communicated, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The hip joint is that which is between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a wooden board placed on the middle of the groin according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And there are two ligaments in two extremities, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And the patient lies on a seat; and then you place the broken arm on the wooden board until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then you suspend it on some heavy cause or the master extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor examines whether the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient is placed on their back and suspends their hand with the collarbone ligament; and then you order two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds it below; and each of them extends to their respective part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with ligaments and over that with another ligament, and each of the two servants extends to their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And then if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it is suitable to place half of the ligament on the tip and the other below the fracture towards the thigh.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the thigh, then it is suitable to place the ligament on that place and on that thigh.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Bandage it with facilitated and easy treatment, and then when it is bandaged according to what is suitable and is applied for good application, then strengthen it if there is no cautious abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Moreover if there is a cautious abscess, then loosen the compression until the seventh day, and place on it a lane of warm oil or rose oil until it reduces the abscess, and then you strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then you place an envelopment of new cloth over the plaster; and then you adjust the arm over that hip joint, and place your hand firmly over the patient's muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over the hip joint the arm so that the arm is in its proper place, if it doesn't prohibit anything from some cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then it uses its own strength.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that which places on the fracture that strength which is more relaxed and stronger than the other strengths; and place between each strength the latitude of the finger, and let the length of the strengths be according to the breaking with an addition of three fingers of the whole part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the strengths with the compression which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your compression over the place of the fracture should be more taut.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the pus has been drained from the fracture, it is the minor structure.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you observe the positioning of the stars and the structure likewise as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess forming, then place the structure and the stars inside until day seven, likewise as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen at the place of injury; or it is prohibited to allow food to reach the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not release the ligature until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their mattress be above the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm dressing full of wool over the affected area, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify everything with your true virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the patient's food in order as we have pointed out to you, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then cover that you increase the patient's food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because it is customary for the affected area and the patient's leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it is seen that they are released and bathed and medicated with ointments that rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is badly bruised, then do not release the ligament and the stars until a month or until two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two forearm bones; one of them is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And sometimes the major forearm bone alone is broken, or the small one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small forearm bone is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the forearm bone is broken above the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small forearm bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to apply a small extension to facilitate its healing.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large forearm bone is broken, then it is necessary to apply a stronger extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you apply a much stronger traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary that you maintain the figure of the hand from the restoration of it and the extension of it stretched out on a cushion, and let the palm of the hand be above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a low chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion underneath it in its height or width, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm from the affected part down to the healthy hand or ligament, and another minister extends it similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor sets the bone in place so that it returns to its best figure as much as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture of the bone is dislocated, then you should return to put everything in its original place with your true virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in the separated dislocation that the code is broken and it is not according to your hope for its restoration, then finish with it and leave it as it was, according to the manner which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is a plague, I have already made a special chapter for that, and so take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you fear an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, and be careful between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over it with subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the wax and place an emplaster prepared from powder of molled clay, and afterwards place stars; and let the star that is placed above that fracture be firm and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the name of the stars of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one forearm bone or in both bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your structure over the location of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it is more certain, extend it to the parts above the fracture or to the parts below it, place the structure a little more softly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the wrapping cloths that are applied over the fracture should not be too humid or too dry, and they must be strengthened with a subtle and coarse mixture, so that we have recommended it between subtlety and grossness.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Examine the limb and its ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you find some cause that requires correction, then apply the correction to the limb, and then wrap the limb with hot water until the correction is complete.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unrestrained until it rests, and then restore its structure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extraction is softened and the bone is re-aligned and similar to those, then correct all that with your true virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excess of structure, so then wrap it tightly for a few days until it corrodes and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Moreover, if the patient does not find any of those causes that we have mentioned, then it is not suitable to delay until about 20 days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient should be suspended for its true virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or at least it is restored in 28 days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You will know that the thumb and fingers do not easily receive fractures, and they do not have sinews unless with very slow movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand receives a fracture or injury, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight and level path, according to equality, and then pause the hand of the patient on that extension.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor joins them together so that they are properly connected in good connection.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, unless an abscess should be cauterized; and then place a star-shaped dressing according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Moreover, if the splint is in the divided parts of the belly of the palm, and then make it resemble a spear of cloth, and command the patient to strengthen that with their splinted palm; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star-shaped dressing of the heart be in the cloth in which it is elevated, so that the body can be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Moreover, if the fracture is in the forepart, then it is necessary to place a star-shaped dressing above and another star-shaped dressing below on the palm, so that the hand can be restored and straightened; and then pause the structure, just as the hand is revolved to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you find a fracture at the knuckle of the fingers, then it is a small finger, joined according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, place a small straightened star-shaped dressing so that the fracture is elevated and not hindered.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Moreover, if the fracture is in the other fingers, just as in that of the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the auricular, or in the anular, then it should be joined and tied to the finger itself; or all the joints according to continuity, and it is better; or place above a small star-shaped dressing, just as we have said in the small finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of abscess cauterization and opposition — in the tie-up operation — in what is necessary when you find some cause of those, according to what is reiterated in the narrative of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the hip is broken and declared to the sense according to what is converted to the part above and to the underlying pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Moreover, if it is properly joined to the root of the hip, then the ligament is properly joined above to the part of the pelvis, so that the extension remains in its place, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the break is properly joined above, then make the ligament properly joined above, and let the extension be in the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor joins the bone in both its sockets more inward so that it reduces to its natural semblance and the bone is conjoined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and structure, unless an abscess should be found in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Sometimes, if there is an abscess in the aposteme, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess has been drained, and then return to your usual care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The structure of the fracture should be made thus: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and double it two or three times, and remove the superfluous; and then cover the leg up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long filament between the thigh and the leg near the knee, and wrap the extremities of the filament around the two parts above, and then roll it over the leg and the thigh so that it does not slip out of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then stop on the thigh at the place of that fracture thus far, and place one star on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the empty spaces between the leg and the thigh with many cloths, so that the structure is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong structure from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have already aligned yourself to the ligament of the place of the fracture, your structure should be less and lighter and more flexible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the filament to the lower parts until they reach the heel of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the stars on the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its own place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the structure on that, so that it does not cause corrosion to the member or abscess or inflammation and appears similar to those; and if any of these causes occur, then cut away from that, and correct what has been done wrongly, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Sometimes if there is a fracture in the bone which has fallen, then cover it so that you hold it together according to what is possible for you; and if not, put something over it and retain it, and care for what precedes the memory until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And several times it is strengthened, this fracture of the thigh or other that are adjusted to the stars, thus as we have said in the auxiliary and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Sometimes in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not cause malnutrition and lameness; and if it is restored alone, or another that has been applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that it be limping from what was previously.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the wheelbone of the knee.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a fracture of the kneecap is difficult to heal, and sometimes it causes many painful troubles.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Sometimes it happens to the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that all this has been said with sadness.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is in such a way that it should be reunited with what has been broken off from its parts, and gathered together again as much as possible, according to equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then stop the plaster and place it around that round star, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure convenient for that.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus as abscess and similar to those in which it is opposed to every accident in what is convenient for it to be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is large and is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle and is called ankle.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason it is made restoration of it thus as restoration of the arm jointly, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is broken, it is destroyed below, and it is one of those causes that are not easily mended.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligamentation of the stars according to that joint.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Sometimes, however, it happens that the fracture of the leg has many rough edges, which should be made smoother and lighter, and alleviated with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you join the stars and complete all the tie of the operation, then you take measures from the wood of pine which has been placed below the causes that were placed in solitude; and make a session of branches of palm; alleviate those from the ones that are small and rough, and not be grasped by the handles, and be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee down to the heel.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop each drap with two enveloping cloths according to the length of it, and place one over the division of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so also below the toes to the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And also bind the two stilhes in three places of the extremities and at the middle location, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right and left side, and it stays in good station.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And mostly be careful that you do this in a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and study it for further study, and you guard against aposteme and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, then apply to him that which is needed to enter so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not always suffer a complete fracture; rather the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fragmented fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fracture, and do not suffer it unless they are in a position of bad alignment.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient places his foot on the prepared ground in this way as if anointed.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and enclose those so that they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply an emplaster and stop above, and place below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that around the foot in descending structure, because you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes of which it is worthy.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when it passes three or four days, then you loosen the binding, because you will find the bones reunited, or reset or relocated, and the operation on those is thus as if experienced.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are reset, then restore those, and reunite them thus as you have and recommended to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the reset toe stilhes according to the length of the toe, and it will be placed a little above one foot; and then place below the foot this table which you have recommended, and strengthen that around the structure descending.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is reset of the bones is two or three or more, then you place above each toe stilhes according to their quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the base of the foot, and it stands on one of the plates of the table near the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which we have said to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply to every accident what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the hip joint of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the rod of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip joint of the woman is reset, then make that descend in that seated position, and then incline it towards the division of the two a little, and it will be held back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife supports the hip joint from below, and it is done in the hip joint of him thus as expected; and then the woman will be comforted, and raises her back a little at a time, because all that is forgotten until it is demonstrated before the division of the hip joint thus as expected and the reset bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows on his back, and when he wants to urinate, remain at the bottom with facilitated ease and then urinate, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you started, and then return to his first pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or around those, because it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take once an ovula of egg and strengthen on the trauc of him a cane of cane; and insert all the bladder into his hip joint, and then sufflate in the cane with virtue until the bladder is inflated within the hip joint, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be filled from below and stayed for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of man or woman is reset, then administer in the restoration and adjustment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and few happen, mostly to he who has some study and use and intend my free book; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via directness in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	More in the verve of man when he is wounded, take a poultice of duck, and put the verve in that; and then pause over the wrapping of cloth, and it will be wrapped, and then it will be laid aside for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	About the restoration of fractures of bones when they are badly bruised.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for that which suffers a fracture and bruising, and it is even more so if the bone is large, thus like the bone of the hip or of the joint, or similar to that, that you take care and prepare the conditions of healing as much as possible, since they have been said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the bruising flows with blood, then it is necessary that you take care of retaining it in such a way that you dust over the injured place with powder, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you delay the restoration of it until the sixth day, until the abscess is calmed down, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, because you will cause a worse accident.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers as much as possible, in a facilitating and gentle extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared by your fingers, then you reduce it with your fingers as much as possible to this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight inches and its width is according to the quantity of the bruise; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take hold of these three or four according to the quantity that indicates to him in the cure of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be rounded, and it should be in a gentle groove so that it is not doubled back during the operation hour.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of acute extremity where the margin is in the hollows of the extremities; and it should be the underside of it with a gross tendon tending, and of its majesty within the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", thus it is a gentle spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevation be paused above the extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it will be enclosed with some balance.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone in every way that we have recommended, then you should insert it in one of the instruments that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then return to those who remain in the bone of roughness and of subtle scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction alleviates the patient of vehement pain ledent, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer with the patient for great joy.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is completed which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in seven stipulations of black cloth, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the bruise or any other cause in which there may be oil, so that it does not become acidic and corrupted.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer stellar remedies at the time of the complete compliment of the bone restoration, and leave the uncovered bruise in such a way that you insert the tube with forceps and uses of wrappings according to the quantity of the bruise.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware that you do not strengthen the bruise on the fracture, because many vain efforts are made by foolish doctors, and they cause death or corrupting mortification or gangrene, so it is sanity.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the strict structure loosens, softens, and differs from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the bruise is great or is a bad bruise, and you fear about those evil accidents which we have recommended, and it brings pain in that place, then it does not behoove to pause over those stellar remedies, but rather make use of those wrapping cloths instead of stellar remedies and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when one or two days have passed since the bruise began, which in it has generated a branch, then you remove from underneath the cloth that you had paused over it for six, and then administer some warm poultices, applying those of our customary usage, which is to medicate the bruises, thus applying tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is convenient for you to remove the ligament and consider the plague in each day, morning and evening, until it is consolidated and stabilized, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the purging of the bad humor from the patient is facilitated.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes several days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed in the arm, then you will know that here are satiating of the small medicines because they inquire into the plague to try.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those satiating medicines, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated from their place and put the member to make pain worse, therefore you should insert them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the plague is acute or chronic, it is stubborn, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you know that one of those is what is convenient for him in the cure of which a preceding narration was made in the seventh chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of this, you know that it is my best sermon and you make present your passion: when the gross is trimmed, emphasize on the member thus like the bones of the thigh and of the helper, and seem similar to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it, because four motives are avoided, which accelerate death; having laid aside that within, which you will purify, for if strong it will be for 20 days or more. And then the plague is cured if you have seen it, and if not, you will not leave it there.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of numbness that occurs in the residue of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many avoided accidents occur with this numbness in the residue of healing from fracture, and it is major because it is close to the joints, and it is obstructed by the figure of the member; and therefore it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the numbness is recent and administer in those medicines that have been stipulated thus as aloes, and enses, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and seem similar to those; also take some or all of them, and compound them so they are stipulated, or album of huou, or agree, and place it on the numbness in this stop, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the extrication that does not dislodge it for several days; and then dislodge it and iterate another, until the numbness is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead descent, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if the numbness is already converted into stone and strengthened, it is necessary to provoke an ostensible contrition, and then separate it from the superior part of the member, and remove the superfluity and eminence, or scrape that with certain remedies until it is removed; and cure it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fracture when it is restored and then returns the subtle member to its natural freedom, following the seven natural principles.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returns the subtle member to its natural freedom, then it is not done except for several causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligation of the joint not according to what is known; or due to superfluity of structure of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member; or due to multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to superfluous movement not in its hour; or due to paucity of health in the body of the patient and debilitation of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the health is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put gauges and lotions on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then pause the poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the most nourishment, or continues to embrocate them with warm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of trimmed bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own that is known.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it occurs to the member already restored with health from tortuousness and eminence to the trimmed bone and numbness, and it is for this fed in the form of the member, but meanwhile the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you do not know that you receive the word of him who exists as that member being newly trimmed.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Moreover, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very detestable, producing great terror in the sign of which it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Moreover, if the numbness and fracture are recent, then you know that they are embrocated with warm water in which they collect softening herbs, thus like they are fueled by altea and radish of it, and mellilot, and seem similar to those; and make a plaster on it with mollifying plaster thus like dyallaquilon is well done; or take mucilage of radish of altea and be continued in gray of gualina or oil of cirami, and be plastered on that; or take fat figs and be trissaded on the colom, and seem similar to those of the medicines that are named asermann's consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some medications are dissolved in a continuous friction that is applied to the most humid parts of the body, and they should be administered with gentle movements of the limbs throughout the day.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Perhaps it is twisted and has gone inside and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked the need for iron therapy, then it is necessary to remove the pus that has accumulated there and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised so that what is superfluous in the node of that meter in the bone is excised with subtle incisions, and it is facilitated by ease in that sollicitated and studied area.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	About sermon on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the shape of the limb is altered, and it causes great pains and lesions.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when accidents occur due to a dislocation, it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay it, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and strongly adheres, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is necessary to massage neither strongly nor gently at the time of inflammation, because many vigorous manipulations bring about spasm and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Perhaps when it happens, it is necessary to apply yourself to the flaccidity of the affected part, and then let it rest so that the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be wrapped in warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole limb should be cured with the water of which the memory will come back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with little movement, and so mollified a little; or they are completely dislocated and complicated, until they are mollified at the joint, so that saliva flows from the affected part and it cannot hold nor open its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	Perhaps when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major arrangements it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	Perhaps if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary to administer reduction of it immediately, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the affected part, and inserts his finger into the mouth to feel the root of the dislocated jawbone, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are placed on the other parts of the body which are swollen; and he commands the patient to relax his jaws and release them from any part; and the minister feels the jawbone and pulls it back into place until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy and does not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned and set in place, and the mouth of the affected part is closed and not mollified, then apply the powder of wax and cerate on those areas, and it will be made with wax and oil rosated; and then it will be tied with facilitation and gentle movements.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be positioned between two pillows, so that it does not incline to the right or left side; and do not force him to eat anything for a certain time; having forbidden him wine for a long time, until when the pains are mollified and the jawbones are numbed, then he can have what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not bother about the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking and citation, until the jawbone is numbed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jawbones is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and do not convert to their proper places, then many vigorous manipulations happen with fever and continuous sweat, and strongly irritates the belly of the affected part, and strongly irritates and vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many vigorous deaths occur to those to whom this happens in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of dislocation of the ankle and extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The ankle is not dislocated from the foot because of its continuity with the foot; and some vigorous manipulations are dislocated to the front part, and this is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on his back and extend his swollen arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then place your hand firmly on the area with your palm, for it will return strongly.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then pause over that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of the one who has the hernia and continues on it, not be dislocated any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and restored according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over that plaster, and powders, and extraction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this manner the cure is reduced, the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the top of the thigh to the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and therefore exits below the thighs, and mostly in those where the flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where the flesh is thick, it is difficult to exit.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often accidents happen to some men through percussion or fall, and the muscle of it is inflamed with a hot aposteme, and it is bruised because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you sprinkle something on it until you are certain of its condition, and then proceed with the cure of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of it is at the parts below the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them diverse manifest differences; and you find in the head of the concave muscle below the thigh the sign of the head of the muscle as if it were a vacuum, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to its proper position, nor can he do it with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the feet or above, then you will find a manifest sign, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; and then pauses with the fingers placed below the thigh, and strengthens the joint in its proper place, and the minister raises his hand, and extends it thus; and then pauses it below so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return for what we have said, and so from the beginning that the dislocation occurs, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water and be given an embrocation that softens and loosens as if it were a poultice of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on his back and paused below the thigh, waiting for a day that it is restored between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor pauses the whole talo over the spine, and raises the head of the muscle in a circle, and holds the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not hidden at the parts below, because it returns thus to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make yourself present as a man who has been placed longer than the patient, and stands on one side of the bed, and inserts his hand below the thigh of the patient and raises the thigh above to the parts so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below the belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that it weighs on that, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way: and it is that a long stick is fixed on the ground with a rounded head of figure, like a pile of mortar, not too big or subtle, and then paused below the patient; because being placed over the head of the stick, the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then extended his hand to the parts below the other part; and the body is strengthened from the other part in fortitude, because the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the quantity which is in length of two arms, and its width is of four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted on the surface of the thigh according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place above the reddened skin a cloth soaked in warm lion's milk, so that it does not harm the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the patient's small intestine in its proper position, and stretch out your hand or arm over the joint towards the divisions above, and place the joint over the adjuster and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a scale of steps according to the latitude, and the hand is stretched out towards the divisions above, and the other thing is suspended from the other part, so that the inner joint is straightened as much as possible.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete according to whatever method you can, and then cover it so that you pause below the small intestine with a quantity of wool equal in weight; and place a plaster prepared with powder of moly and album of wolf on all the muscles, thus that it is revolved from above, and place strength below the small intestine with decent structure; and the ligament is revolved over the plaster, and the hand of it is annexed to the neck of it, and let it be, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And cover that the food of the patient is paused for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring health to him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food is given more abundantly after seven or eight days, and an exercise of movement is done; and thus if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated often due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then cover that in that case there should be administered a cautery with three tractions, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days are elapsed, the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and structure are reduced over certain affected areas, and it is not strengthened and can't be elevated to the parts above, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is done from the feet and knees or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another structure should be administered there, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it affects the healing gravitating in the member and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many affected areas until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it falls below the vein or below the touch according to whatever figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, that is manifestly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the underlying muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you know that the hips, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible from the front before it comes to the apostema of the hip, because if it comes to the apostema of the hip, difficult is the reduction of it, and often it is not healed at all; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of major pain, and many affected areas are dying from that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended with two fingers, and its arm should be expanded, and the fingers of the metacarpus are placed above the hip and below it, and the joints are fixed in the hollows of their own fingers, or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns also so that it bends the hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the root of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same thing with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arm is revolved from all parts, because it is enveloped in a doubled cloth over its hand, or ligament.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the metacarpus touches the joint with its hand, until then some oil is poured for so that it helps in lubricating the joint and facilitating; and then fix the joint with a strong push until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it is covered by placing it on a plaster in which it is stipulated and excised with album of wolf, and it is strengthened in a decent structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and let it be for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is released; and so if the joint is formed in the same place, then you release the bandage of it and let it be like that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you iterate the plaster and bandage, and let it be like that for several days until it is externalized; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Maybe it happens to him by gravity towards the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humid heat in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place a cushion on the alleviated joint, so it is not bothered by excessive motion; and then it is tied, and let it be like that over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put it in bath; and when it sweats, then you warm the joint with tempered friction, and then place it over the alleviated one, so it is rounded by motion, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in a wrapping of bath, until it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place on that wound of humid and scaled skin with a bandage and strengthen over it; and do that several times, because that is humid and reduces to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	About the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	A shoulder that has some veins is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and the opposite is for other joints, but mainly because it needs velocity in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, so long as the place is apostematized or it doesn't happen to it an apostemic affection.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's arm on a table and the doctor extends his arm, and he places his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its own place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	Maybe it is necessary to consider if the palm has been stayed against the belly of the arm, then the patient places his back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding over the back of the arm, then the position of the doctor's hand is intrinsically above the table, so that the doctor's hand fits over that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And then if it returns soon, good is; and if not, then strengthen that with an emplaster at once the apostema and let it be like that; and do not iterate that, because if not, you will not suffer nor be able to put on the reduction of it, since it passes into its days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Maybe the joint is Roman according to its tortuosity; and do not notice to the patient any cause, but that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the sake of its treatment and fortifying its confidence in some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the emplaster which we have recommended, and let it be like that and strengthened for five days; and then release it and let it be like that and the hand of it should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Maybe if the movement of it is stayed and happens to it some gravity, then you warm that with hot water and friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	About the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Several times it happens that the toes are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when some of those toes are dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then hold the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then sustain the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to release it during the day and exercise its movement, and bind it at night; and do that for several days until it is strengthened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly to that, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and bind it to that part and do that first operation on the injured toe, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do that when it is dislocated at other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	About the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to some of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is said that the evacuation of the patient is out of their will, and they cannot retain it; and many times some members of it are mollified or two heads of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many times it is removed and many times it is done the removal of it in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has been decided that the affected parts behind are numbness and are called geltosity.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of it is that sometimes you should consider whether the geltosity comes from poverty, because sometimes there is no cure for it nor any healing of all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Maybe in this case you see by chance or by percussion or by similarity to those, the Ancients had manners of treatment in sermons very prolix, from which the most returns to profit; maybe you have already heard about that one from whom little is known of his tropism, due to his proximity to my intention, in which he has expounded and formed diverse instruments of that, with which I will show and expound it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in geltosity that comes from the front of the foot, there is neither engendering nor healing of it; and similarly in this case that it is done to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except the one that comes from the back properly, just as I recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face over a soft pillow near the wall, and should be extended with his extremities mollified so that the foot of the patient is not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the bed near the patient's head, and another stick in the air above their feet on the other side of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one minister holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then envelop over the patient's head and below tighten the little linen band firmly; and extend the extremity of the linen to the stick which is above their head, and tie it on them; and then strengthen the other band around their hips, and above their legs; and then adjust all the bands and tie them on the other stick which is above their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should carefully extend the band to the part of the stick, and they should not be numbness in the two sticks and the bands from their own places where they are fixed, maybe however they will not be firm as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor puts his palms on the spine with strong pressure until it returns, or puts on that one table, and then adjusts on the table their own feet until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Maybe if it does not return by this method, then take a table of which the width or length is in the air of three arms, and dig into the wall where we have said that it is near the patient, a place where the extremity of the table enters.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor puts his feet on the other extremity, and stretches well until the spine is constricted and returns to its own place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, remove what is revolving in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground above the patient's head at the back of the bed two sticks, the length of which is one arm, and above their head at the back of the bed also two sticks; and let the length be between each stick a palm, and already it is done in each stick through which the course is turned, and each should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick in which the course is turned, and let it be revolving in the two tracks of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of it there is a track in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm where it is revolving; and in the two other sticks it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the bands that have been stretched on the feet of the patient in the track which is above their head, and the bands that have been stretched on their thighs in the course which is above their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then there will be each course and there will be a minister who turns the course with their hand, and the doctor will straighten the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the course:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then because the spine has returned, and the place is straightened, then it is necessary that you put a plaster exciccatiu on the album of Huou, and then stop; and then put on the plaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around them, and its length is as much as the place of the geltosity, and above the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be tied with the band that we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until they are healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains some impediment in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines which mollify and liniscan are administered with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place a lamina of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some evacuated humors accumulate in the back of the two spines, and it is gathered for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already has been minimized so that it does not converge to make a prosompcio with this medicine, because it will strongly contradict you to come to that mort.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	About the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not simply dislocate, but rather it is because of something that happens to those joints with small movements and cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, either it is dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated inward, and rarely outward or forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation inward is this: when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to match the sick one, it is then longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the sick leg cannot bend its knee towards the shin, and it is in that place where the shin bone is displaced from its proper position, so that the head of the thigh bone has deviated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that one which is subject to outward dislocation is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that one which is subject to forward dislocation is that it expands the leg according to its natural tendency, but it cannot bend because of the pain in the shin, and if you try to walk and cannot put weight on it forward; and its urine is retained and its knee is displaced, and its walking is impaired on the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that one which is subject to backward dislocation is that it does not expand the shin, nor can it bend forward because the knee cannot bend, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the knee is weakened, and the head of the thigh bone is out of place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and chronic, that it has already become accustomed to having it, you will administer reduction of it according to its disposition, then it is not in total cure; and therefore it does not seem that there can be perfect recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you will find what you need to return the joint and extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left, so that it returns strongly and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this way, then you need to prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the part that is below, or with its own muscles, or with the ligament that is tied above the shin; and another minister extends the hand of that one downwards so that it reaches the muscles below the thighs; and you strengthen the ligament on the joint of the thigh bone, and hold another minister to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And its extension is from the ankle to the knee, or from the inward part to the outward part, or from the backward part to the forward part.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And its extension is all of these in one way so that the sick leg is elevated above the level of the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that we spoke of in the proper cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is inward, you need to resupinate the sick leg above the healthy one; and then pause the ligaments on the joint of the thigh bone in that place where the head of the thigh bone is between the shin and the knee; and then extend the ligament from the part of the knee to the outward part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes the arms of it, and firmly grasps the large joint of the sick thigh and extends outward with vigorous extension, so that it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of the most gentle cure in which this member is reduced, unlike the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is exhausted above you and does not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then you need to tie the two feet of the sick leg together with a strong ligament, gently, above both ankles and both shins.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And its length is of each one according to the quantity of four fingers, and the sick leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the sick leg is suspended above the head of the beam, and it is in the pulley; and its length from the ground is a quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh bone, and it is suspended with the sick leg another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh bone in strong empowerment, so that the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Most in the reduction proper, when it is dislocation at the fore part, it happens that the patient leans over a support according to what we have recommended in having gelatinized; and strengthen the ligament over the affected leg properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two pads, one on their feet, and the other on their head; and place two adjusted pads on the middle of the affected joint, over which the humors are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pad being between their thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts does not become twisted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extends to their own part, and the doctor has their hand engaged in the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey the reversal, it will be great; and if not, pause over that diligently and thus as we have said in gelatinizing for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Most of the patient leans on their sides, which is the quietest position.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the lower parts, then it happens that the leg is extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on the joint; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected side, and then cuts off that hand with the other hand, and in that cutting off, they pause the extension to the lower parts at the part of the ankle.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts, then it does not happen that the patient is extended to the lower parts, and it is elevated above the ground; however, it happens that they are placed on a hard surface, thus as it happens with the examination if their ankle is dislocated at the fore part, according to what we have said about the setting of them on two ankles; and it is on their face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it happens that an administered compression is applied to the table on the area where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, since the reduction is completed as it happens — and the sign of the reduction of them is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient stretches out their leg and expands those excuses, then you know that the member has returned to its place — and then you adjust both thighs and place a bandage and stretch on a splint so that the ankle does not become dislocated in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those joints in their proper place, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore the patient can walk again.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply that, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, and make it wait in ambulation over some crutches for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the Cure of Dislocation of the Ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated at the fore parts, and at the hind parts, and sometimes at the lower parts more than at the upper parts; and at the lower parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you order the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient straight, thus they extend their leg, if possible; tie the two to the face of it, and place their foot between the two feet; and then make them hold the ankle with both palms, and retain those between the two fingers on the ankle with strength, and another minister extends the affected foot until the ankle returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh without labor or effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk about for some days, until they are healthy and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	Most of the reduction of it is excused, then you must strongly extend the ligaments in the cure of the preceding narrative on the treatment of the hand.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the Cure of Dislocation of the Ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes is removed by small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either at the hind parts or at the fore parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflated proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of the patient's movement is to reduce fatigue, and it is necessary that it be extended with facilitated movements and enclosed within so that it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the cure of one who is dislocated according to complement, it behooves that you straighten the patient's right side, and hold that strong and valiant minister behind the back of that one in the middle place of theirs.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you put your right hand on the upper part of the foot above the ankle, and your left hand below the foot at the place of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then you pull the foot with your right hand, and place your left hand for two fingers' width, and stretch out your left hand; and you bend the foot's toes towards the leg's knee.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two finger-widths according to what we have measured.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you bend the foot's toes towards the third finger-width, and you are at the calf.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns to one finger-width or two according to this method, and if you find the foot enclosed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and stretch out a blanket firmly fixed to the earth, and enclose it between the patient's thighs, and you have already enveloped it with a cloth so that the patient does not escape.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the minister of theirs holds their thighs, and another minister stretches out the foot with their hands or on the collar of the foot; and then stretch out that certain minister against extension of the back part, and the blanket is stretched out between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of theirs is not attracted to the lower parts from their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor encloses the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And thus when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of theirs, then pause the plaster and stretch out that strongly with the bandage, and tie the foot to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And it behooves that you fear or guard against the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage on that is not violent and holds that strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage is softened, stretch it out.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove it on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not dissolve and corrupt on them, and then that which does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you happen to find a postrema wound, then it behooves that you administer in the cadence of theirs what precedes our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is remedied.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It behooves that what is dislocated be enclosed with little extension of its knees; and that which is not difficult, it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then it behooves that you straighten the patient's foot on the ground or on a table, and it should be standing thus as if it were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and pause the foot on what is imagined of the joints, and then calcify that with your foot in a upright position until it returns, and see that it is already enclosed and does not appear in the prominent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause below the belly of their foot on a table that takes the whole foot, which has two cups, and then stretch it with decent structure and firmness for three days; and then remove it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are made with plague or fracture or some other evil signs.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you happen upon any of those causes, and you fail in the cure of that and in the restoration of theirs, many finger-widths succeed in bringing about death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that it does not behoove to presume about the cure of theirs, except he who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and pitiful, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that heal apostemas so well, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but to him from whom you hope for salvation, from alleviation of evil, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then it is necessary to hasten so much to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, lest an apostema wound occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns to its desired position, then administer careful regulation, which will cure the wound and heal the plague that is convenient for him from the swelling of the affected parts.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is a fracture and it happens in the separated bones of the sacrum, then you perforate their statement, and make it so that we have said in the simple cases of this type that it is preceded in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and flee according to your virtue from the instrument of fear through the ways which are shown to you as it was preceded by my prediction; for it is better for you to give thanks to your Creator, and may it be more permanent in your glory, and may there be more salutations to your body verily in that time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you will finish the prayers of Albucasim, perfectly fulfilling those which God may bless.
Amen.	Amen.
