Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The opening words of the treatise begin: "Thus begins the words of Albucaisem."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh children, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last part of the science of medicine, because it has been concluded by its own result, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, it seems to me that you will be able to grasp that which belongs to you in this treatise, which is divided from my operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For my operation is abolished in our region and at our time, entirely private, except that little light remains of it, and the remnants of it are left; and there remain no more than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been modified by most errors and misunderstandings, until the intentions of it are sealed and its force and art are lengthened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will revitalize that same order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may be familiar with the forms of the cauterizing instruments and other tools of the craft, as is necessary for addition to the declaration, and preparation for the work, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no good craftsman can be found in our time who has his own hand is because the art of medicine is long-winded, and it requires its own practitioner to have been exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew, so that he could know the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and having knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and the arrangement of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they are inserted.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name is not much, but in the small work, and most of all in the art of surgery.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy, will not be freed from error by which men will die, just as I have seen many of them, since some are formed in this science and fall short of its science and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you saw a foolish doctor and ignorant cut open the esophagus of a woman, and cut through some arteries of the neck, so that a great deal of blood flowed until the woman died between her hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who insisted that he pull out an abscess from a man's body which had progressed in his condition, and the abscess was large, and it came to him and tore open that abscess with a piece of the intestines, so that that man died three days later.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you had already been asked to pull it out, and I saw that due to the size of the abscess and the condition of the patient, I knew that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was receiving a stipend from a duke in our land for surgery, and he applied himself to a blacksmith's apprentice who had a fracture on his thigh; and the doctor, with his ignorance, pulled out the fracture, above the wound, with pulleys and astals with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And the doctor untied it according to his desires, and then he re-wound it, and then he left it for some days and ordered that we should not loosen the bandage; and so it was that the thigh and leg became gangrenous, and ultimately led to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you were called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and consequently he found relief and began to forget his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But meanwhile corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to corrupt the limb until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess and had it ulcerated about three days later, so that the magnitude of his evil was revealed to him by the lord of him.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which is because the cancerous boil is pure of melancholic humor, whereas it is not necessary that it should spread to him entirely, but rather be in a member which suffers as if it were being hosted by it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be divided into two parts: one is the operation which is associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is peril in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed here in every place of this book where the operation is in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and avoid that, so that the foolish ones do not take away the way to speak and to disown you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way with the grace of God to obtain salvation and noble succession, and avoid the terrible diseases that are difficult to cure, and keep your arms at bay from this which makes you afraid, so that your situation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is more remaining for your glory, and then again in the world and finally in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen already said in some of his own sayings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not heal bad illnesses, lest you become a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the book begins, and the first part is on...
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and ironwork of cauterizers, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on incision and puncture, and on cupping, wounds, and extraction of splinters and similar matters, all organized and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and re-location, and on curing of torticollis and similar matters; a chapter organized from head to foot, and according to the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauterization with fire and sharp medicine, and on remembering the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In this, begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	You should know the quality of the joints of that cauterizer and its inconveniences, and in what condition it is prohibited to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the joints of the cauterizer and its inconveniences is a long and prolix sermon, subtle by science, and secret and hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are in disagreement among themselves, and I myself am afraid to prolong the sermons of theirs.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization is contrary to the entire universal complexion which is in matter or its materials, except for two complexions which are caudal with respect to their materials.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and scorching complexion with respect to material, it will desiccate; for some people say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, namely that cauterization is not suitable in a disease which is caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a scorching and dry disease with water that is hot and dry should be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite, that through cauterization the joints are made healthy in all scorching and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its moistures to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the sermon of that, that experiment is this too already known to me several times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not think that it is necessary to bring this forward again, as it has already been explained and exercised in the chapter on cauterization, and to understand the diversity of the complexions of men and the disposition of diseases in their respective bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexions, it is not for you to be afraid, and most especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors have agreed on these, and there is no disagreement among them about the joints being cauterized in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And understand, children, that from the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and its goodness, it is clear that those who burn with medicine are contrary to cauterization with fire, for the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is being cauterized and does not harm another member adjusted to it except with a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine that is contrary to cauterization reaches those members which are distant from it, and very easily brings disease into a member with difficult healing and very easily leads to pus.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, because of its sublimity and good substance, does nothing but superfluous things. And it is already known to us through experiment and long duration of service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of this sermon. And if it were not that it is not read at a better free time in this pause to you, a secret hidden by fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion by which it drives out diseases, with a philosophical demonstration sermon, which would be keenly felt in your souls.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And understand, children, that the time of year is not harmonious for making a cauterization and the best time of early spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, because the harm caused by the accidental timing is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cauterization, and most especially if it is for necessary pains or painful necessities, which do not tolerate delay because they are feared by those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through the timing.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it is not considered in your souls, or, children, this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so that to that disease which is healed by cauterization, it is not reduced at all times, and pause is made after that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus as they say because of this, for cauterization is nothing but in a place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors that are the cause why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous over medicine due to the desire for its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that its disease will return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it by the accumulation of superfluities there, and what is brought forth in its acquisition through food and similar causes; but if the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humors, just as cauterization for toothache and similar pains, it is possible that in that case the pain will not return, but rather it will be reduced to smallness.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And in addition, the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and it is a despairing word, not because I understand what they mean by it, for I think it is not healing that profits through medicine or any other cause approaching cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine only when we administer the methods of healing in certain diseases, and those medicines do not conduce, and approaching the end of the cause, one administers cauterization, and it profits at that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here on I want to make it clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which is different from that of the common people and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cauterization does not make a difference, as long as it is absolutely true, because you have already proved and experimented that it does not matter in some bodies except for others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron just as they say; but on the other hand when you do cauterization with fire using gold, it is not to be declared, because it is hidden according to the quantity you want by the roughness of the gold, and how it prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust the ignition above it so that the gold melts in the fire, and case some plates are formed from which the artist can observe through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore it is made necessary to do cauterization with iron, for us to proceed more lightly and more properly towards the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have arranged those from head to foot, so that the one demanding it may easily find what they want in it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On Cauterization of Headache due to Coldness and Humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization brings relief to the humidity and coldness above the severest accident of which there are two causes, namely the cause of soda and the multitude of raumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the partitions of the eyes and ears, fluent, and the multitude of sleepiness, and toothaches and the gout, and universally all disease that comes through coldness, just as paralysis, sodality, apoplexy, and similar diseases in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: first, I command the patient to be purged with lactative medicine in the head, clarifying it, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the patient and their age and habit demands.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and after that, to make a circle between his temples on a well-crafted bench, and to place his hands on the pie-shaped pieces.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then I command him to pause the razor's stroke at the edge of his palm, right above the nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the said place is reached, mark that place with a tent, and then ignite the olive cauterization of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause that cauterization on the marked place with a tent, in a way that it descends, as your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then raise your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see even a small amount of bone being uncovered, such as the size of a grain of error, immediately lift your hand, and if not, return your hand with that iron, or another like it, until what I have told you is seen by the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and let it sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause above that spot, surrounded by border and let it sit on top until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with gentle quadriform medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better it gets, because it is better and more healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the cuneiform should be cauterized into the bone, and the cauterization should be kept until some part of the specificity of the bone is consumed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then that which has been adjusted to the bone will be removed, and then it will be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cauterization, it will come to the end, and then it will press into the bone a strong impression until the bone cracks, and this is the form of little alpha.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they think that from that place, the vapors of the head will evaporate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the open wound should be kept for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I do not see these two species of cauterization in general, but only in certain men according to the way of fear; and leaving that aside, as you should know, it is better for health when it is so; because the head is revealed by solution of continuity like we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a frivolous nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cauterization is more saved and better for me; and from that house and with that work, I have health.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On Cauterization of the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the entire head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs and this is prolonged in the patient's suffering, and they use remedies such as warships, comb-like things, poultices, plasters, wads, cauls, and gualinas, and especially if it has already been cauterized with one cauterization which relieves but does not benefit at all from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in their nature; and if it is not frivolous and finds a great cold, then that cauterizes another cauterization, leaving it for a little while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the crown of the patient's head with a cauterization until the cuneiform is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cuneiform and uncover the quantity of bone which we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cauterization in the posterior part of the head in the location called "vas" - and it is that location where the wind pipe is paused.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift up your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will experience great and diverse pain unlike any other pains from all the other cauterizations of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will say this cauterization in its place, because it is necessary that the cauterization with which we cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtle than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization of Migraine Non-Antique.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When it is necessary to evacuate the head clarifying medicine, and another cure is administered as I have said in the descriptions of diseases; and if none of these benefit, then cauterization takes place in two ways: either with acute medicine that is contrary, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But the cauterization with medicine that is contrary is when you take a lump of aloes, and scrape it off, and cut off the extremities of both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the location of the pain on the temple with a sharp lancet, until it makes a spot below the cuneiform, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with a stopper, so that the constriction descends gradually, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the alum and treat the wound for two or three days, and then pause above it surrounded by border until the spot becomes hard.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with gentle quadriform medicine until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some contrary medicines which I have written in the two treatises on contrary medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite by cauterization of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of claw in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause above the spot of pain, and keep your hand - so that the archery which is left behind is not consumed - and rotate the small iron piece by piece with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is consumed by the specificity of the cuneiform is as much as half of it, and lift up your hand to prevent the artery from being consumed which is left behind, in order that no flow of blood may come.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then pour the spot with saltwater and pause it above the location, and leave it for three days; and then pause the spot with a border, and cure it with gentle quadriform medicine until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize with the edge of the cimeter according to the cauterization, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-antique migraine.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Cauterization of Ancient Migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migraine with what we have said about the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not benefit, and sometimes by the disease it is not enough to apply what we have said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary that you ignite the cimeter cauterization until it is albified, since you indicate above the spot of pain with a line of length which is most of the digit or whatever; and place your hand for one moment and strengthen it so that the artery is incised and penetrates into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to damage the mandible's continuity, which is affected by mastication, and that the lacert is not consumed and the nerves which are related to it are not damaged, and that there is no spasmodic spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially at that which ignores what it does and is not studied or practiced; and leave the operation in place at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find it as a reminder of the regulation of blood flow by accident of the artery according to its own manner, in your own location of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cauterization and you see the patient's body is tolerant, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cauterization which we have said in the chapter on strengthening of artery with two cauterizations, and it is better cauterization this one and more conformable.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On Cauterization of Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the earache there is pain due to cold and it is cured by lacrosse causes and another cure which I have said in the division, and if the pain does not subside, then ignite the cauterization point, and this is the one called "puncta", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then pierce the puncta and ignite it, and bring it around the entire ear as a wheel is revolved, or in the circle of each example if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along with the cauterization, go slowly and gradually with the razor of the ear, as you have marked the location with a tent.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cauterization of all those points in the entire ear is done, and whichever one you want, and then cure the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On Cauterization of Torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and with cauterization is not but of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that develops due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture with herbs and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and your cure does not conduce, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first is a little bit of the razor of the ear, the second is a small spot on the temple, and the third is the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cauterization at the opposite side of the unhealthy part, for softening only appears on the part that seems to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauterizer at the right extremity of the ear, a little bit above the crown of the head, and on the temple another one, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's tip, and place your hand with the cauterizer until the quantity of the majority of the specificity of the cuneiform is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is a species of the cimeter, the form of which is before us.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however subtle it may be, you should see that a little bit of it is so; and it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh a little bit.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with what we have said before, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Cauterization of Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with what we have said and your medication does not conduce, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauterizations: on all the horns of his head; and with a cauterization in the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and with a cauterization in the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cauterization is made according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is even later; and then be cured with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Cauterization of Oblivion caused by Flux.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient in the beginning large herbs and pills that serve as a clarifying medicine.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then take off the patient's head and pause on the back of the neck an ointment as described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for several times, because it is a manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do so according to the method which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if by those it is well healed; and otherwise, then do so to the three cauterizations in the posterior part of his head, which are descendants of the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cauterization with what has proceeded.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to add more and the patient is so tolerant, then do so to the middle part; and if you wish even greater addition, then immediately cauterize that on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And then cure it until it is healed; and be the cauterization olive-shaped according to the form given before.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Cauterization of Paresis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary for you to process in softening of the head with herbs and with what we have said; and then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize that with three cauterizations: one in the middle part of the head, one on all the horns of the head, and one on the posterior part of the neck, and three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for many and tolerating patients, and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually with cauterization until it is consumed by the cuneiform of the back, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure it until it is healed, and this be olive-shaped cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Cauterization of Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No, the epilepsy is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it is necessary to clarify the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient's disease is great and is tolerant, except for medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarismes and mastiguateurs which serve as clarifying medicine, before that for several days, with good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize that with one cauterization in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another cauterization on the back of the neck, and cauterize each horn of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerating, then cauterize that with the cauterizations which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And be olive-shaped according to what has preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is an infant, then pause subtle cauterization according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are moist and corrupted and flux is gross, then cauterize that with the cauterizations which we have said in having paralyzed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink that which clarifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then take off the patient's head, and then do a torture decently done to him on the circle, and then pause that in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated comfortably, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then pause with a liniment; and it is more worthy of ancient border of sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with a tempered heat by measure, which the patient suffers when it is in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle part of the head on the circle, and leave it until it is heated up.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do so with the patient in one week's time, with another regimen of it good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that by making small points according to what is most suitable for him, unless you hold your hand with a cauterizer thus ordered: this is a species of cauterization which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then pause that in a cloth wrapped around it in linen or gray wool.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Cauterization of Water Descending into the Vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the vein by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which clarifies the head of him, and guard against all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle part of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauterizations on both temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or from one side if it is the beginning of water in one vein.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cauterizer all the veins and arteries that are below the cuneiform; and be the cauterizations in that length on the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of blood flux when it is cauterized; and if you see any blood flux from him, stop it with some medicine which is at your disposal.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the excision of those and caution against blood flux.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized in the vertebral bone below two bones with two cauterizations produced gradually.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location on the outside of the head and it is verified that this is superfluous frozen flux, then cauterize that with a cauterizer which we have recounted in the chapter on beginning of water flowing into the veins, and with a cauterization in the middle part of the head and two cauterizations in the vertebral bone below two temples, and with two cauterizations in the vertebral bone below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add more, then cauterize that on the entire length of the cuneiform bone over the extremity of the forehead with a small cauterizer.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Cauterization of Foul Smell from the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat him with the water which we have said in the division and your treatment does not produce the desired effect, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient those concoctions for three nights; and then take off his head, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cauterizer and an olive-shaped cauterizer.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clove-shaped cauterizer and two cauterizations on both foreheads below the hair, a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And with the clove-shaped cauterizer, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization of Softening of Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cauterizer having this lunar-shaped cauterization; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that on both foreheads a little bit with two cauterizations all around, and be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And be the length of each cauterization according to the quantity of the forehead.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is absorbed.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Eye when the hairs are converted to the inner parts and push the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eye are converted to the inner parts thus that push the eye, cauterize them in those places according to two manners, either by fire or by medicine which is concomitant.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with cauterization of fire, command the patient before that he looks at his hairs thus as those which clarify them, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if push that you should not let it be, then stretch the eyes of him with a bandage so that no harm comes to them until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, pause the patient's head in your seat, and then seal over the eyelid of his eyes with a tent, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of mercury, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of hen or in mucilage of papyrus over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cauterizer, whose form is this:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure which has been sealed, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the cuneiform bone which is thus like a leaf of myrtle, appears properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of him raised above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped around it until the scar is elevated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if some cause returns to the hairs and the eyelid is softened again, then do another time the cauterization on that just as you did originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized so that the hairs do not push into the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cauterizer with concomitant medicine is this: you command the patient to look at his hairs until they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a chart on cloth in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take from known salt and living cause one ounce. The end! And then what is here, and mix those causes well, and make this with a festival so that it is not heated up; and then spread that water on the chart which is made like the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and pause that over one eye or both eyes; and pause below the eyelid wrapped in albumen of hen, and the patient's head be in your seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then pause the said thing on the medicine and press that a little bit, but do not harm it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for sting is in him like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then when you see that he has received the sting, pause and let the medicine be as it is; therefore when the stinging ceases, rinse the eye with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted thus as it has been washed away by fire or incision, for it is well; and if not, return to that place of the medicine where you have not yet applied it and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the eye is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped around it until the scar of adjustment is eradicated; and then cure that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to be vigilant and diligent in your operation so that the medicine does not fall into the eye; and if the eyelid becomes softened after some days and some cause of the hairs pushes into the eye, then repeat your medicine on that location where the eyelid is softened, and do just as you did at the beginning, and apply it to that place until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to greatness and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let not the way of rectitude be hidden from him who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Lachrymal of the Eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure fistula with the water which we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize that according to this manner: command the patient to pause his head on the seat, and hold the head of him by some minister between the seats in such a way that he is not harmed or agitated with his own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause with a cloth wrapped in albumen of hen or in mucilage of papyrus over the eye of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterizer, whose form is this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	the shape of which is a crescent, like the form of a cane or a pen nib of a vulture, from one extremity to which the cauterizer has been made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, let it come out like a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But meanwhile that which is concave is better for the operation.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then pause with the cauterizer which is well ignited, and take a little bit of that to the corner of the eye at the edge of the nose, so that your hand or the patient may not be disturbed; and then pause the cauterizer on the gray of the eye and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of your cauterizer you see it go into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterizer once or twice as needed; and leave that so for three days, and then pause with a cloth wrapped around it and surrounding it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has passed 11 days and is not healed, then pause with the sharp corrosive medicine so that the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in your own chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some earlier doctors said: take the place of the fistula and fill it with a sharp corrosive medicine, and then pause in that fissure so subtle that its shape is this: Pour into that the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and take your hand with a small spatula having good retention, and do not let the patient be harmed because the melted lead will reach the eye of him; and it is necessary to pause over the eye of the patient wrapped in albumen of hen or water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and cures that by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the water which we have said for cauterization and cure, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to make a cut of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Cauterization of the Wounds of the Pots.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times accidental fissures occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the water which we have said in the divisions and your cure does not take effect, then ignite the small cauterizer like a cutlery according to this shape that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the concavity of it according to the subtlety of a cutlery.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then pause that initial application cautiously in those fissures until the cauterizer reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Cauterization of Fistula in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an abscess forms and bursts, and then is softened, and then is corrupted, and a fistula forms, and then you cure that and your cure does not take effect, it is necessary to ignite the cauterizer according to the quantity received in the fistula; and then put that ignited cauterizer into the track of the fistula, and take your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it make it thus once or twice; and then cure that with the water which we have said for curing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And then if the pus is extracted and healed, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what will come in its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On Cauterization of the Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you cure those with medicines and do not confirm, then pause the patient's head on the seat, and ignite the cauterizer in the form which will come thus, so that you pause the quill over the tooth and insert into that the ignited cauterizer hastefully, and take your hand a little bit until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should fill his mouth with water of salt and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop that, because the decayed tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-First Chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On Cauterization of Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or in it is cold or warm, and your cure with medicine does not take effect, then cauterize that in two manners: either by border of cows, or by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauteri by border is that you take the border of cows and boil it in a cow's hide, and then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and immerse that in boiling border, and pause that over the painful tooth hastily until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the border as said above, and pause that over the painful tooth, and pause on top of it with hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the concavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But meanwhile the cauterization by fire is that you attend to the quill of iron or steel, and it should be in the core of it some graveness, and the sharpness of the fire not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape which will come, and pause that over the tooth and take your hand until the cauterizer is cooled; and do this several times because the pain has been alleviated or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that by the impression of that cauterizer, the patient fills his mouth with good border and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cauterizer.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you wish, with what you can do at your best.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the quill:
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Extrophuli.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophuli are covered with phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines and you wish to promote digestion of those slightly, then ignite the cauterizer in a concave shape as follows, having two extremities curved so that the smoke of the cauterizer rises from the other extremity, and pause that ignited cauterizer over that abscess once or twice, or as many times as is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days and pause over it wrapped in a cloth until what the fire has burned out is alleviated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the quill or cauterizer for this is as follows:
Capitol .xxiii.	Twenty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Nodes on the Voice and Constriction of Ale.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come up to the canal of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by coldness of congestion, it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that in the root of the throat in the depressed location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not bring the cauterizer to the glottis nor burn a large part of it, but only a small portion.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And then cauterize that with another cauterizer at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cauterizer should be shaped like a claw, as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with water as previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization of Disease of the Lung and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and disease of the lung are caused by cold humors and the patient has no fever or sweating, and is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the furcula in the depressed locations of the lungs; and another cauterizer in the middle location of the ribcage between two mamillae; and let the cauterizer be shaped like a claw according to the previous description.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make the cauterization punctate with the cauterizer that is called a puncture, the shape of which was previously described in the punctation of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make holes into those places; and then cure that with water as previously described until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cauterizers have three curves where cauterization is done on that: in one stroke you can do three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Cauterization of Titillic, which is the head of the aid.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the aid is displaced due to lubricating humors and it is not fixed in its return journey, and thus the displacement is caused by a small movement such as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the displacement first, and then reverse the patient's position onto his back or onto one side; and then lift the bone which is located at the back of the citillic towards the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is displaced backwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauterizer having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the bone until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will come to be that of four heads of cauterizers.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtle ones according to the quantity of tent; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And several times it is adjusted according to this count, and for which are the cauterizers 8.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cauterizer with pores filled with salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be hurt for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the displacement is to the upper parts and there it is made so, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cauterizer or with punctate cauterizers, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humors come into the stomach to such an extent that the contents of its congestion are multiplied and are increased, and if you continue with the methods of curing and do not confirm, then it is necessary to place the patient on his back, and stretch out his arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauterizers: one cauterizer leaving the ribs for the quantity of a finger shaped like a claw, and two cauterizers leaving from both sides of the cauterizer, until the figure of triangular cauterization is reached; and lengthen between them so that they are not adjusted to make a precipice.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterizer is equal to the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the bone.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cauterizer be according to this form, with addition; and if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterizer in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cauterizer according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctated with that which is frightened by this cauterizer: and it is that you sense on the stomach point according to the quantity you wish with a tent, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the points; and then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Cauterization of the Fettered Foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain comes to the foot due to coldness or moisture or great swelling, and it is caused by excessive egression from its normal state, and the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not confirm, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back on a pillow three times according to this form and this quantity, so that the cauterizers are applied to the foot leaving the iliac bones, where the human decubitus takes place.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be between each cauterizer according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizers be according to the length of the straight arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your foot with the cauterizer force.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water used is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the bone, and not more adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then let him sit, with his legs stretched out, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if you are able to cauterize those cauterizers with a cauterizer like a dagger, when it is according to your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the bone be adjusted so that it is adjusted to the whole body and reaches into the vessels, for this bone is subtle here; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Perforation of Abscess of the Foot with a Cauterizer.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you have an abscess or swelling on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience great weight and pain with no sharpness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then with great pain and sharpness that sometimes fatigues even the doctors with its cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto his back on a pillow; and then sense the location of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cauterizer which is similar to a rag, the shape of which was previously described on another page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize with that cauterizer until all the bone is consumed, until it reaches the pulp, until a healthy pus is formed.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cauterizer unless you are well-versed in the art of medicine and have studied many diseases; but this one may be tried occasionally with boldness on this operation, but nonetheless leave that which I have written, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterization of Piles.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauterizers of the roots of aristology said that piles are made to be treated in this way: take a long, dry root of aristology, a pointed one that is found, and it is of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and ignite it at the fire, and then cauterize with a cauterizer in that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauterizers as guides, one slightly inclining towards the side below the beard, and with two cauterizers on either side of the fifth rib, inclining slightly to the back parts; and with another cauterizer in the middle location of the foot; and with another above the stomach, and with three cauterizers at the back parts; and with one cauterizer in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauterizers on either side of the foot, leaving the cauterizer which is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cauterizer, but rather be in the manifestation of the bone in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient ones said that some men are such that they use a cauterizer of iron like a ray and ignite it, and place it in that location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess and purges out pus, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cauterizer there is no fear, for they die soon after it happens in the location of the fistula to which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Thirty-First Chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Cauterization of Melancholy.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of melancholy with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then make a cauterizer in that location according to three ways, all of which are right-sided, of which one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melancholy according to the figure of the cauterizers of the foot, the figure of which was previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the thickness between each cauterizer be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cauterizer be the method which we have said in the cauterizers of the foot equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand with the cauterizer; and let the patient be lying on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And it is another method of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cauterizer having two handles, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the bone which is at the end of the melancholy where the patient's left side lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be that which you raise the bone according to the length of the body, so that they may make cauterizers according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two handles, ignite one, into that which is on the other side of the bone.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cauterizer; and thus make four cauterizers.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cauterizer having three handles.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then cure the cauterizer more thoroughly than you would leave it to gather dust for many days, because it is more certain that other causes precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrophobia.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not cut in hydrophobia, but rather in a specific and proper manner.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrophobic with the methods of cure which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with four cauterizers around the umbilicus, one on the stomach, one on the foot, one on the melancholy, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterizer be proportioned to the subtlety of the bone.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cauterizer untouched for as long as possible, so that it may gather dust and not be used again.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of cure near the cauterizer with water as is necessary for two purposes, and thus hasten to it with the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauterizer with which the stomach is cauterized is claw-shaped, according to the form that precedes it, and it is this one with which the back is cauterized, olive-shaped, according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Cauterization of Pains and Limbs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the pains are abscessed in hydrophobic and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary that you cauterize the pains on the back of the knee in a cauterizer that is between the auricular and anular, and raise your hand with the cauterizer and do not turn it; and then raise your hand and do not return to it, for the stagnant water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cauterizer according to this form: And then make two cauterizers on both limbs, and in each limb make a cauterizer at the extremity of the cauterizer like a claw.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauterizers be according to the length of the limb: one at the top and the other at the middle location of the limb; and on each limb, two cauterizers.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open without cure for a long time, so that some water may flow out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Cauterization of the Belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is afflicted with heat and moisture to the extent that it weakens the virtues, namely the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is not cured with the methods of cure we have said and does not confirm, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization of virtue appearing, then cauterize him with a great cauterizer on his stomach according to what precedes in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterizer of the circle and four small cauterizers in the circuit of the umbilicus, with a claw-shaped cauterizer; or two cauterizers.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excess of moisture appears and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize him on the navel and intestines, and firmly adjust two cauterizers over the stomach and near the groin, for it is perfect cure of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Cauterization of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there remain old hemorrhoids or one of the gross humors is inflamed or corrupted with moisture, and they are not cured with water as we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then cauterize him with three cauterizers above the left and right triangular bones of the small back, and with a cauterizer above the navel which falls on both sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe that the stomach of him is inflamed and his food is not digested, and his face is often abscessed, then cauterize him on the stomach with a great cauterizer according to what precedes; and one cauterizer on the foot, and another cauterizer on his melancholy with a claw-shaped cauterizer; and leave the cauterizer untouched for some time, and then cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On Cauterization of Athletes near the Absence of Their Own.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess athletes, then ignite the cauterizer that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And then insert that ignited cauterizer into the abscessed athlete, and finally apply your hand until the cauterizer reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make so one or two, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and finally cure those with water that confirms their wounds until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a great cauterizer on someone, it is more certain in judgment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Cauterization of Fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its location, and the patient is frightened by this, let him be healed with a cauterizer.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when someone has a fistula in the natural opening, and it is old, filled with stagnant blood and corrupted moisture, and therefore what is most fitting is that you probe that one with a subtle attempt, and then know the quantity of its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And then ignite the cauterizer that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that ignited cauterizer into this fistula, and according to the quantity of the depth which the probe has reached.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then iterate over that one with the cauterizer until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one, two or three times, according to your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestines, then beware of all those places; and do not make a cauterization unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you are certain that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all matter has been abscessed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matter is not removed from there, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting, or falling into those causes of which a reminder will be found in its location.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Cauterization of Tonsils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the tonsils there is pain from inflammation or excessive ventosity, and because of this the patient's throat is pained, then it is necessary that you cauterize each tonsil with a claw-shaped cauterizer of which the description precedes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And then cauterize again with a small one, so that three linear cauterizers will appear, and therefore they will be more certain in judgment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Cauterization of the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize him on the most distant part of the bladder, where the hairs of the navel begin, and cauterize with one cauterizer on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cauterizer be according to the quantity of the nails on the foot; and cauterize him with a cauterizer in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauterizers if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a claw-shaped cauterizer according to what has been processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Cauterization of the Arm.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is inflammation and moisture in the arm, and because of this it is prohibited to make an incision, and the menstruation of that person is corrupted, and it is delayed in its provocation, and accidents occur causing pain in the movement of their arms, then it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauterizers in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterizer on the most distant part of the back, or with two cauterizers, and let it be a claw-shaped cauterizer.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture is poured into the part of the hip, and certain causes of swelling occur in that location, and a sign of it is that the limb is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is located in the way it has been described above.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circular cauterizer similar to a ring, as you have sensed with the probe in the circuit of that part, and because the part falls in the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let it be the cauterizer of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterizer is not available to you, then cauterize with three cauterizers and one large olive-shaped cauterizer.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cauterizer be made according to the quantity of the subtlety of all the bone; and then cure that one until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Forty-First Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Cauterization of the Sciatic Nerve.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the part of the hip, and its cause is inflammation and moisture, the patient is cured with water as we have said and does not confirm, and it is old, then it is necessary that you cleanse the patient's gross humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize him.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cauterizer in that is according to two methods: either a cauterizer with burning medicines or a cauterizer by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It is according to two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize him on the part of the hip with three triangular cauterizers in this shape; and make a good depth in them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cauterizer be the quantity of the thickness of the said digit, and if it is an olive-shaped or large cauterizer.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes there may be a cauterizer on the middle location above the head of the hip, for there are four cauterizers.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, and let it be a continent and burning circle that consumes the subtlety of all the bone.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and does not spread into the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it spreads into the joint, then you should cauterize him with two cauterizers on the joint above the location where the patient feels the pain; and one cauterizer on the femur for about four inches a little bit away from the pubic area.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauterizer is knife-shaped, and let the depth of the cauterizer be according to the quantity of the subtlety of the bone.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient says that the pain is spreading into the location near the bone of the feet, then you should cauterize him there where it hurts with a cauterizer for three to four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient says that the pain is below the kneecap and into the joint, then you should cauterize him there with a knife-shaped cauterizer.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterization that you do not leave the cauterizer on for too long, so as not to burn nerves or large arteries, and because of this it may harm your patient or cause contractions.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those which I would cauterize on the femur and finally in the cauterization, and the leg becomes inflamed with fire until the tumor reaches the foot, and the fire is perforated and corrupted all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then comes forth a strong solution of the belly, and therefore death ensues.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men say that in the cauterization of the hip, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, whose circumference is one-quarter of a palm; and be careful with your opening according to the thickness of a walnut or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle is another third; and be the space between them the quantity of the nails on the foot; and let those circles be two parts; and let their length be one nail or two nails, and make in them a border of iron decently adorned with the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And then be ignited in the fire until it reddens and gives sparks, and then be placed on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize him with three circular cauterizers in one motion.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave him for three days; then apply an ointment to the wound and let it remain open for many days; and then cure him with remedies until he is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Thus says Albucasis: "Oh, sons, of this type of cauterization we have used little, due to the fear of looking at it, and therefore few have found those who look upon it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from good cauterizers that suffered there, and finding the location of it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cauterizers with burning medicines are those that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which the guaffo of the iron door is seen; let the length of the partitions be in the height of theirs be two nails or as many.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then pause over the part of the hip the patient lying on their side, and press your hand against the part of the hip; and then take cold water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be like a small fire gradually, and hold that for an hour, and apply the mordicatio and adjustment to him — as if from fire — until the mordicatio ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the cold water from all of the hip with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave him for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the adjustment is removed, and leave him thus for some days, and he will recover his strength; this is the final stage.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure him with remedies until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the joint or leg, make him stand in water according to how it is done on the hip equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of cold water, and you have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and unextinguished cause, one part in each side, and mix them together and pause in a new wave of which the left part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause then the bottom of the wave in another wave enveloped, and place above it alkali and living cause with warm water that absorbs them by one finger, and then press them with your own hand for good compression, and leave the hole to descend from the sharp water into the left part of the enveloping wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and place it above another living cause and new alkali renewed, because that which is done with great force of acuity will be administered in many operations of medicine and cauterization of other members, where the operation is done by fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of these medicines with which the hip is cauterized, such as mezquit and manna crataegi, and living cause mixed with saba in such a way that they are blended together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounted the story of a man from antiquity who was operated on and cured with an operation that relieved pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and magnificently emphasized how wonderful it was to see him, saying that he did not need any further treatment, and that he was healed in just one moment like this, because he had already taken a bath and eaten food from that very thing.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And thus it is that one must take a certain kind of vertebrae, and if not found, then take a recent fig tree; and mix it with a little bit of gray matter and place it on the hip where there is pain, or in the joint, or in the leg, and bind it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient shows relaxation of the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in water and thus when the body is relaxed, immerse it in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines unless there is an evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Escorides says that when a goat's wound is cauterized on the sciatic vein, it will soon benefit him; and let the cauterizer be taken with him according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's flesh and infuse it with fire until it becomes carbonized; and then place it on the wool and leave it inside until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then iterate this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the biting reaches into the hip and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called "cauterio de vaquas".
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in the two due to many causes, such as by fracture or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes through infusion of moist and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cauterizer is not applied except in this single species which is made by effusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with fetid pills and similar ones that are made on the two in which there is pain three lines according to its latitude, plus a sign or more in each line, depending on the quantity that appears from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let there be cauterization with pointed cauterizers.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizers with a middle clavish shape according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Giltiness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this illness befalls small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs suddenly on their stature, causing elevation and movement in the alleys.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it is found in the last vertebra of the back and the nails of the body that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and wish to prevent it, immediately cauterize him with a circular cauterizer according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cauterizer on all sides of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cauterizer two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let there be proper points between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the place until it is healed with the water that we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware, for cauterization should not be administered in a giltiness caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pains are caused by hot humors that envelop each member of the body, then when pains come to the feet, it is customary for doctors to properly call this condition "podagra".
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout caused by hot humors is cured by the method of cure and the pains are not relapsed, then the relapses are cut with cauterizers.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that you cauterize him by evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauterizers.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let there be an olive-shaped cauterizer, whose form is this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the skin of the foot, then make them with a pointed cauterizer.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the joints or to other joints, and many times they are endued with it, then cauterize him on each joint with three or four cauterizers of all sides with this olive-shaped cauterizer.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauterizers are needed to perform this operation, then cauterize him and do not press too hard with your hand on the cauterizer, so that it is only as much as the thickness of a bone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the joint and the back, then administer the cauterizer which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the most part and it is called sugar, then point in the circle of the nails as they turn, point in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remains pain in the said places, then point in the circle of the nails on each nail and on the tip of the finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise close to some days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize all of them on all sides of the aid.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient without good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and evacuation is made by this cauterizer, then he will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a wound occurs in the groin and says that it is open in front of the belly button, and this is how it begins to approach, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to leave off his food on that day and to use gentle causes so that the wound heals from its own ventricle.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to hold his breath until the pus is drawn out or appears as an abscess.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return him to the said place and signal with your finger the rupture on the bone of the ribcage, signaling the extremity of which is similar to half a circle at the upper parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauterizer, whose form is this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is red and gives sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the abscess or swelling to its natural shape, and then place your hand on the location in order that the swelling does not increase.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already placed between the joints of the patient and left him to rest one joint, another serving on his legs, another on his feet, which hold their own hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then pause the cauterizer on him, signaling with your hand where the cauterizer stands straight, and make him go into the bone of the ribcage to the middle of the duiduni; and repeat it another time if you have not achieved it in the first attempt, going into the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely the signs of the abscess at the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn that abscess for fear that on the patient there will come to death or another great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cauterizer, do not touch the bone, nor combine your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cauterizer for children be subtle according to their age and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then cure the location of the cauterization for three days with border, until the scar of the fire is renewed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure him with other remedies until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lies on his back for 40 days until the location and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary that you pause the patient's nourishment according to the length of time of his healing, and that the abscess does not burst forth from the effort of recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, after 40 days, gradually make him descend, and keep him thus for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be reduced in labor and replenishment of food and drink, and of loud voices, for when he uses this regime of entire healing, then he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will say that the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly is similar to the beginning, and if it does not hold, then cauterize the rupture with a round cauterizer according to his quantity, and let it be like the third part of him; and then cure him as we have said, and it will not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some firsts have already said that the rupture is cauterized with a triangular cauterizer according to this form, since it is signaled by intention:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that goes by the latitude on the side and above the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a clavish cauterizer, but the first cauterizer is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When it occurs in some members due to fracture or percussion, and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to cure with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cauterizer.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cauterizer be for every member according to its magnitude and smallness, virtue and debility of it, location of twist and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterizer, good it is; and otherwise, then let there be iteration on him with the cauterizer; for it is customary with those pains to punctuate one member against that member which approaches it, so that you must achieve those with the cauterizer until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprosies are made with a cauterizer through great benefit and merit, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putridity of fat and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize him, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and do not delay, nor hesitate, and fear for the patient that corruption may comprehend his entire body and all his complexion, then cauterize him on the head with many cauterizers: one in the middle of the head, and another a little way off from him, up to the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, place your hand with the cauterizer a little bit into the bone, and make a small impression on the skull, so that the displacement of the bones is caused, and the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and then cauterize on the malleus according to what has been prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already expanded on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with those cauterizers which we have said in the head; and a cauterizer on the extremity of the nose, and two cauterizers on both mallei, and two cauterizers on both vertebrae of the neck, and two cauterizers on the vertebrae of the back, and one great cauterizer on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each ankle bone, and two on each toe, and two on the shoulders, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the phalanges of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves that are over the tarsus, lest you burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cauterizer on the bone of the ribcage and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauterizers, the more beneficial and suitable it is; and know that the patient does not have pain in the cauterizer, just like they do in their own, because his body is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauterizers be great or small according to the members and joints, as directed by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cauterizer with flour from error, with honey and with other cures until he is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is stunned or asleep and is cured with medicines, oil, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stunned member with cauterizers according to the greatness of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cauterizer enter into the profundity of the bone a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure him with a remedy until he is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and at the vertebrae of the back, and then the numbness of the nerves that affect that member is restored.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of Albaras that is Morphia.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When albaras is old and does not respond to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on it with a pre-owned cauterizer for a little bit according to the quantity of the specificity of the bone until its whiteness and color are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure him with flour of errors and lentils with roasted oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and with blood of dove or with blood of yronda, each part being one portion and all mixed together; and apply a cloth to the location and place it there until he is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of Cramp.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cramp is beginning and you want to relieve it, then cauterize that part with a circular cauterizer in the circle of it as it is revolved.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cauterizer in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, for I fear it may be ulcinated, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more suitable that it be cauterized in the circle of it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauterizers.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Adultery.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adultery is delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to superfluous making that one, or because of the condition of the patient, for it is old in decrepitude, with little blood, or by time, and you want to hasten the maturation of adultery; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small cauterizers punctating; and apply it until it fastens in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cauterizer, then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form: and place that in the middle location of adultery until it penetrates the bone.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterizer in that location is more distant, because the arm's body is alleviated; and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is corruption that wanders in the member, which corrupts it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corruption in a location where it would suffer a cauterizer with fire, then ignite small and large cauterizers, many and few, according to what is fitting in that location where the corruption is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it entirely on all sides until you eradicate all corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then apply it for three days, and pause on the locations that have been cauterized with a mixture of oil, so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then cure him with flesh-generating remedies.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, good it is; but otherwise, then iterate the cauterizer on that which remains in the corrupted locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corruption is medicated some times with acute medicine, for it is a means in place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, cauterization by fire is more beneficial.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure of it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Nails and Other Similar Things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens that the parts left behind of a patient who has a condition called "claw" are caused by a large, entering wound which lames the foot; and there is cauterization in those places according to two manners: one being cauterization with fire and the other being cauterization with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But the cauterization with fire is that you ignite the concave-like cauterizer resembling a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw of all parts, and it is of subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause that ignited cauterizer on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cauterizer in the circle of the claw until the cauterizer penetrates to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then leave it for three days until you begin to see a bruise.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply that with wild mallow leaves trampled with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the location with flesh-generating remedies until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times it happens in the surface of the body, especially on the arms and legs, then you must administer in those places cauterizers with water; and this is that you take a quill made of reed or iron or vulture's beak, and place it on the claw; and then pour into the quill some quantity of hot water, and grasp your hand, and you revolve it with compression from all sides, so that the margin of the quill presses against the root of the claw, and the hot water flows through to the front of the root; and let the patient endure for a little while the burning sensation of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, because the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do this to those places where you have applied the other, until you come upon all of them in their place on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those places where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with this same flesh-generating remedies which cause the skin to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the Cauterization of Trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When it happens to anyone that they have trembling due to a strain on the nerves or because of a fever caused by a strain, or for any similar reason, then you must cauterize that place with four cauterizers or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cauterizer; and with a cauterizer in the feet of it, and over the stomach of it, with an olive cauterizer.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of him subsides and hastens the recovery from the strain-caused illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Bruises on the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When on the body there are accidental bruises that burst forth pustules which are caused by gross corrupted matter; therefore it is necessary at first to appear as if so, that the whole head of the fistula be cauterized with a subtle cauterizer made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended by fire; or with roots of long-ago-dried estrogia; or with a lentecular cauterizer.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize beforehand at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, and it is disrupted by the superfluity which forms those, and cures from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however, it is necessary that this be done properly with evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the Cauterization of Blood Flux Accidentally Caused by Arrow Wounds.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times it happens that blood fluxes of arrow wounds are caused by the incision of the wound itself, or from the opening of apostemes or cauterizers on the member, and thus it resembles, and it is difficult to heal that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, as it happens to anyone in this case, then you must take the cauterizer made of your own hand and put it on the wound, and place it firmly upon that, many times, until the blood flux is stopped by the aforementioned cauterizer, and there is no more bleeding.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause in the fire the olive cauterizers, small and large, for many times, and exhale upon them until they are thoroughly ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those one small or large one according to the location and wound in which the artery has been broken, over that vein more quickly than you would have removed the aforementioned, and place the cauterizer on it until the blood is stopped and constricted.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the wound of the artery when you remove the aforementioned and extinguish the cauterizer, then take another cauterizer, carefully selected from those which are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And take care that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that you bring over the patient another harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those places, and especially when the artery is large, unless through one of four methods: or with a cauterizer as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted, the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted; or that it be bound with thread or ligament through strong traction, or that medicinal applications are made upon him which virtue is to constrict the blood; and be strengthened with a pillow and constriction decent.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers constriction decently by ligature and binding with threads or through the position of constricting causes and similar ones, does not come to fruition until late.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work with patience on the indication given above over the wound of that vein just as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the superior part of the wound, and on the artery let what has been removed not be; and on top of the artery be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and more carefully in that there is need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Starts the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On the Incision and Perforation, Wounds, Bleeding, and their Similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all illness in which cauterization with fire is suitable and with medicine that constrains, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments needed in those places, and we have organized the chapters from the highest part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter by that same manner, so that whoever wants to know about it may be illuminated on what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, dear son, take note that in this chapter it is about the same terror as in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times blood evacuation occurs, which contains the life-giving substance that flows through the veins or incision upon an apostema or warning of exit or purging of a wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of a boil and their similar ones.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And among all those, accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that upon yourself do not fall what is written here, for sometimes you will have to use the ways of men with many mannerisms of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among those are some who will flee from their illness and it is easy for them to meet death, and thus because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with illness there is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is one who gives you his word and promise, you hoping for his health, and his illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to one who comes to you with this manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any cause without aprop certain science which verifies what you see, and which leads to blameless succession.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses the prophecy and indication of that which is converted into health, for in that is aid to you on the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspires His understanding in you, and does not withhold direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinct by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterization, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be illuminated for you about what you request and which you need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter One.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water Contained in the Head of Children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs in children during the period of childhood and when the fontanelle is still open on the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children; and of all those whom I have seen, death has claimed them, and thus it is what I have witnessed in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that one child whose head was filled with water and the top of it was always magnificently expanded until he could not contain himself anymore due to the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased to the point of mortal fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity either accumulates between the vertebrae and bone, or accumulates behind the bone above the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Therefore, the operation in that case is to make an incision on the middle part of the skull with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be about two fingers deep until the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the apostema is greater, then two incisions are made in this way:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is behind the bone, then it is signified that you must open up the commissures of the skull all around and squeeze out the water when you compress that with your hand on both sides, and there will be no more hiddenness.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary to make an incision in the middle part of the skull with three fissures in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And immediately after the incision, extract all the humidity; and immediately strengthen the fissures with cloths and poultices; and immediately immerse that part above in vinegar and oil for five days, and then loosen the ligament and cure the wound with tents and bandages, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision that considers the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or on the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore, attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the accumulation of water, and make it as best you can according to your skill.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and thus avoid bleeding of blood and death of the patient due to that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the Incision of the Arteries which are near the Ears, called Hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Third.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is catarrh or rheumatism in the eyes or feet and it is chronic, and there is no agreement on that with medical treatment, then the last resort is to make an incision on those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those which the patient's head is filled with, and immediately freshen up the place with an asperous cloth so that the arteries appear, and immediately strengthen the neck of the patient with a few cloths; and consider on what pulse the vein is; and the places of each one over the places which are near the ears, depressed, and only in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And immediately sign over the artery with a tent, and immediately incise each one with the spatula of each side going up to the incision which penetrates into the bone, and that is so by the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incision on the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two finger-widths, for when some vein is cut, the blood flows out with pulsatile emission, which jumps forth repeatedly.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three finger-widths, and immediately sign with a tent, and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And as much blood as flows out is equal to about one quarter of an ounce. and not too much or too little flows out from it, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the accumulation of the artery in it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone some cause of the skull, then incise it in order that no hidden apostema may occur.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And immediately strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and immediately cure it with dressings until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some ancient or chronic disease migrates to the temples, due to humid and aggravating conditions, and by the quality of the lacertae in the temples, or an old and violent sores and similar ones, and it is medicated with the methods of medical cure, but this does not help, then we have resorted to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing those just as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient has boils on the temples; and understand that the artery appears in the temple, for it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden from most people due to the intensity of heat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and immediately freshen up the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula, the shape of which is:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And immediately cut the vertebra with that [spatula] with ease until you reach the artery; and immediately get into it and extract that from the upper parts until you extract that from the vertebra and uncover those tunics which are below it, of all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then immediately envelop it with the tip of the spatula, and immediately incise one part of that according to the quantity by which the extensions of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise from all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And immediately evacuate about one quarter ounce of blood. until three [ounces]
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you divide it into two parts with a double fold of cedarn or cordage to a length, and not fear putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and impending flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And immediately incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or at another nearby.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone and a cauterizer like a scalpel until the extensions of it are incised, and remain in that same place.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a state of scalding complexity; for cauterization is one of those causes that helps to finish off the humidity, and therefore it is better in judgment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to immediately extract the arteries that fill the place with old blood, and let them rest on decently made powders, and be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some remedies until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another vein suddenly bleeds from the artery, then immediately take care to stop that bleeding, either with a cauterizer or by filling the place with old blood, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of these causes are not present to you, then immediately pause your touch on the place until the blood is coagulated, and immerse the place in hot water with vehement heat until the acute pain subsides, and strengthen it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two blades, since you have marked out the two places with a tent, and each one is motionless, until they reach the bone and incise the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extensions of it may be elongated, for it is not fully consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades is exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But even if there is less sharpness than two blades, it is better, for if they are sharp like two blades close to each part of the flesh, and do not cut through the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is some thickness in those [blades], it is kept that the heat of the fire is applied to those and the flesh is cut away slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between two blades is equal to the thickness of a digit.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Cure of Eyes with Acute and Acid Lachrymation.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the eyes have acid lachrymation, and it is the core of those veins which are above the forehead of the head, and does not agree with any cause for medical cure, and the face of the patient becomes red and there is wandering in his forehead like a march of ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, wet as if they were crying, and their eyelids are scaled off by the acidity of the tears, the ancient agrimenes mixed into the cure of those with this operation, and named it "spassa".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to scratch the skin which is on his forehead, and immediately incise in the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two finger-widths: one fissure should be equally distant from the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lashes which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the incision of the arteries which are in two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three finger-widths adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or cloth with dry fibers which absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And immediately insert the spatula of two sharp extensions, the shape of which is:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excoriate with that the entire vertebra which is between two incisions on the skull which is above the bone, and immediately make it migrate into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And immediately take this spatula and insert it into the first incision another time with a different instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the blade of that scalpel so that it touches the flesh annexed to the vertebra, and the edge of it is inserted into the bone, and push it in until it reaches the mid fissure, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But continue the incision up to where it appears on the vertebra, and immediately make it in the mid fissure into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since there is a quantity of blood equal to that which has coagulated, express the places of the sponge with coagulated blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately pause in each fissure with old blood, and pause over those powders made with vinegar, oil, and vinegar mixed together, so that there is no hidden apostema.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the bandage and administer great effusion of hot water or tepid water, and immediately cure with ointment basilicon made with rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Cure of Lachrymation by Cataracts and Eyes Descending from the Parts Behind the Head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there are acute and continuous cataracts in some veins and they continue, and the patient's eyes are exhausted and small, and the regard of their pupils is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and their skin dry, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then know by these accidents that the matters and cataracts come only from many veins proceeding from the parts behind.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, and immediately incise a fissure in the middle of the forehead, about as long as the width of a finger (and begin with the fissure of the left temple and extend it into the right temple; and the incision should be made into the bone; and stretch your hand over the lashes of the temples which are above the mastoid process), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry up all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and immediately fill between the two lips of the fissure with old blood or dry cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And immediately strengthen above with powders made with vinegar and oil, so that there is no hidden apostema.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the apostema has diminished, then it is necessary to freshen up the bone until it begins to show flesh, and immediately cure with an emollient regimen which will make the flesh appear, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and from them make a poultice, and administer it to these wounds in the natural state of the skin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Cure of That Which Causes Humors in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that occur in the ears are one of four species, for either it is a mineral peyra or a similar cause, such as iron and lead, or it is from a plant, such as cumin or fava, or it is a fluidic cause, such as water and vinegar and their like, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when peyra occurs in the ear or some other similar cause that does not agree with the ear, and pauses the ear at the sun, and if the peyra times it, then immediately distill into that some cause of violet oil or sassafras, and properly administer the extraction of it, and make the stornutacio to come out in condition, and stop up the nose against the occurrence of stornutacio.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And immediately pause in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the parts above, because many times it is forgotten about these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if not, then immediately administer the extraction of it with the instrument called "epicaricatic gestures" which are subtle and have this shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if forgotten about the gestures, it is better so; and if not, then immediately administer the extraction of it with a subtle instrument of slight duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if not forgotten about this, then immediately make a canal of iron and insert the end of the canal into the opening of the ear and close around the canal with wax and softened oil so that it is only open to the canal.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And immediately extract with your breath strong attraction, because many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if not forgotten in this manner, then immediately take from the candlelight or the prepared wax with which birds are caught and taken a small quantity, and pause that on the extremity of the ray, and immediately wrap around that spot decently paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And immediately insert that into the opening of the ear with ease, and immediately dry out the ear from its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if not forgotten about all the causes which we have recounted, then immediately take care to cut off that before it becomes a hidden apostema or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting off that is to first bleed the patient from the sephasic vein and extract blood according to the virtue of it, and immediately make that cease between your hands and convert the ear to the parts above, and then close with a small fissure in the root of the ear over the grey matter in the location previously prepared.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be of a lunar shape until it reaches the peyra, and when the peyra is atrophied, stop that if possible with appropriate instruments; and immediately close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause is in the ear is one of the fat that you consider and which swells, then immediately administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your sight, then immediately take a subtle spatula according to this shape:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the removal of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause in many pieces, and immediately extract those from them with onces or subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, for it is facilitated the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use stornutacio in condition at first, and fill his own ear with some old blood, and pour over that ear where the water is, and if forgotten, good; but if not, then take many sharp peyres and lemons according to the length of a finger, heat those in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of them into the opening of his own ear and strike with another peyra on the peyra that is behind the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not stop until all the water has been forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And then the water will be forgotten, just as you take paper or parchment and... and place one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end with fire until the wax is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then take another piece of parchment and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract that with a cannula just as described above.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But if an animal enters into that ear, whether it is small or great, and the cause appears to the sense of smell, then immediately administer the extraction of it with gestures and onces, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But if there is a worm generated in the ear, when you cure that with water as we have said in the division and treatise on distillations, and your cure does not agree, then it is necessary to gaze at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then immediately extract that with gestures or subtle onces, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula made of straw and expanded above, which is shaped like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle end of it into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and immediately suck with force through it, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey you in this way, then immediately stop and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the shape of which is:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or iron, made from straw, with a small hole in it and a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore be as they are driven to what is in the convergence of the cannula of content here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it around the end of it decently cut off, and immediately pour oil into the convergence of the ascent, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the cannula -- and that is in the ear --, and immediately insert the ray with a cut-off end and press gently with your hand on that with a mild compression so that the oil is expelled into the convergence of the ascent and the patient feels the oil outside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted in the ear is already scarified with fire, a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you are about to distill in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear cannot withstand it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Earwax.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some times, some children are born with the vents of their mothers unperforated, and this already occurs in some men, opilacio in the meatus of the ear due to a wound or flesh not perforating in that place; and this opilacio sometimes is made in the prominence of the tract of the ear which does not allow the sense of smell, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the prominence of it, which does not comprehend the sense of smell, is in the greater difficulties of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which comprehends the sense of smell, it is necessary to pause the ear of the patient towards the sun and gaze at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if there appears an apparent obstruction, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is in the ear where there is a small width, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two lion's claws to prevent any harm to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the meatus, then immediately take that with subtle onces and cut into it with a vehement ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the prominence of the ear, then immediately take a subtle iron rod and heat it with fire for a little while, and then insert that into the meatus of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have sensed obstruction with what the patient feels with ease, due to the gravity of having it, force the oppression of it with ease; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately apply a cloth soaked with the liquid according to the quantity of the width of the channel which you have wrapped in Egyptian bandages; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some powder and pour it into water and pulverize over it as it is sown, and use it; and if the ear has already become apostemated, then immediately extract the liquid and replace it with another liquid which you have wrapped in wax that has been made with rose oil, until the apostema is calm; and immediately cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then immediately submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and pause it over the ear, and use another cure that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Athazil, which afflicts the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazil, which afflicts the eyelids of some people sometimes moistens them, and at other times makes them dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, take those with tenacious or onces, and cut them with a spatula of their own roots, and immediately apply it to the places as sown.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with bleeding occurs, then immediately cauterize those with a subtle lunar cauterizer.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to do it near the incisions and many times when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	On the Cure of Grandiness which comes to the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times, something develops in the eyelids of humans due to some cause which is related to grandiness in its strength and hardness, and because of this grandness it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is that you should immediately consider whether the grandiness is proceeding from there to the eyelid and is spreading to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision on it with a fine fissure by the width, and immediately examine that of all parts with ease until it evaporates, and then suspend it with onces and cut off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the incision of it is not well-apprehended by you, and only pushes to penetrate the eyelid with a slow and gradual incision, then immediately this will not come into any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is great, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it, because the humor of it restores that and fleshifies.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandiness is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, you must smooth the surface outwardly; then immediately elevate the eyelid and suspend the grandiness with onces, unless you need an incision, and press that from all sides, and if the eyelid by incision becomes lengthened, this will not come into any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And immediately after the incision, wash the eyes with salted water; and cure the place with that which fleshifies until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the Cure of Axirna in the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axirna is a grayish substance which is generated in the tunic of the eyelid above, and most often develops in children, aggravates their eyes, and causes great pain to them; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because of it, for tears are shed upon them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you should often wash their faces with water at all times, and on their faces they sleep; and thus the eyelids of theirs below are covered with humidified lids, which have already been inflated, and a visible approach to swelling is in the eye; and when you press the location with those things I said, you will bring forth swelling into it.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that which the patient places his own head on the edge of the bed, and immediately pauses a cloth of linen and of wool, and makes of it a ball; then immediately makes a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach of all parts, and immediately pauses that upon that and presses with those things I said from all sides so that swelling may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and immediately ends in the middle of that humidification with a spatula incised by a fissure by the width, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the prominence it is necessary to cut through the cord completely until you reach the swelling, because in the greatest difficulties process of swelling by fissure according to the form of white greasiness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said ties and the outer parts and revolve between the right hand and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and thus cause damage to it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not find swelling at the beginning of the fissure, but that you adjust in the fissure a little with ease until swelling processes; and immediately extract it as we have said; and immediately submerge cloths of linen in water and vinegar, and pour them over the place and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus all that remains of that moisture is salted and poured into the convergence of the fissure, so that this which remains of that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an apostema occurs in the place, then immediately cure it with caustic poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On Methods of Touching the Eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of humans there are noted by the adjustments below the natural skin and are becoming old, then immediately those things do not belong to the eye and make ways for bad diseases such as constant tears and softening of eyelids and tissue until that is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye; and cure it in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or by sharp medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made into an atactini by incision and suture; or by canals as you will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore it is necessary that you pause the head of the patient on the edge; immediately convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, so be it; and if not, then insert a needle into that which has felt of the part below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the felt above, and thus - right next to the margin of the eyelid where the skin is - next to the skin, and pull the felt upwards towards the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And immediately end at the outer part of the eyelid below the skin adjusted with spatula incised from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and immediately extract the needle and pause below the eyelid with small powders of coto or cloth, and immediately send over the eyelid with tentation, and it will be thus as a figure of myrtle fuel.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But in any case it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is already diversified among humans, for some of them are those who need to have a large quantity incised from the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And immediately end with the spatula on both lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is right next to the natural skin, just as it is the widest part of a king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And immediately insert the onces into one of the two angles of the cord, and immediately extract it all, and immediately adjust with a stitch the two lips or fine wool thread, and wash away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads over two eyelids with some visible causes, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And immediately loosen the stitch of the threads within three or four days, and immediately cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitching and cure it with that which dries and strengthens, for the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of humors; but stitching is better. And thus I say to the ancients who taught to taxinate.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in this case there is solicitude over the patient, and it is of good operation, and not from fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in taxinating, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure such as myrtle leaves, and immediately elevate the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to take the threads, and this is not adjusted, then immediately take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and enter the other thread next to the lacrimal major, and the second thread next to the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said ties the threads in equality, and immediately raise your hand with equal elevation, raise all the cord above which is marked as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And immediately adjust the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an apostema occurs due to your incision or your fissure, calm that apostema with cerote and like it, and with gentle motions.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it is necessary to touch the eyelid which its own skin is converted, then it is necessary that you use in it what we have said about incision; but stitching in each case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Atactinating with canals is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and immediately by art make two canals or two thin tubes, of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width is smaller than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And immediately add each one with subtlety over that which is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and compress the canals of each part with a strong constriction, and leave it for some days, because the cord will die and become denigrated and will sink in until it comes back.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then immediately cut the cord with scissors, and immediately cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On Elevating Painful Skin in the Eye with a Needle when the Skin is Hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is non-natural, hard and rough, and painful to the eyes, the operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and insert it into that subtle thread of cedron and linen, and immediately adjust the extremities of it and notice what each one does in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be equal to the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And immediately compose another fine thread below it in brief, and tie the extremities of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And immediately place the patient's head on the edge, and be right next to the sun so that your work may be declared, for it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And immediately insert the needle into the root of the skin adjusted which has required an engineer, and make that thread penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And immediately pull the skin up and insert it into its place, and be the number of skins one, two, or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And immediately pull your hand with that until the skin is outside-put and in its place in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is pulled out of its place and the skin is not put outside, pull it to the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is put outside above the uppermost part.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at that with the vision of the eye, for you will take out the thread and the skin, and grate some and clean the eye, and leave the closure for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its place and grows above it good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then you adjust one long piece of natural skin, and elevate it with that, or leave it so that it will be lengthened to its proper space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure of Echachatry which appears in the Eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears in the eye echachatry, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted upwards or sideways, to the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of wound or section or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this echachatry either is natural or accidental, and is made by consolidation of wound or sections or cauterizations, or by resemblance to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation in this case is that you open up that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary that you use a cure for this condition from the causes which dry and constrict; for if you do so, it will return to echachatry even worse than before, having no time at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that condition causes which soften, such as fenugreek, and mix it with the water in which are steeped high-quality seeds of linen or yarrow, or a gentle poultice made from aquilon, which is liquefied with some oil, and submerge the cloth in that mixture, and cure it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all skill and art, not allowing anything to be consolidated in its place, according to the form that was present at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is nothing but some correction of echachatry that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure of Echachatry which is made in the Eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This echachatry which is made in the Eyelid below, which is truly named echachatry; and it is either of a natural or an accidental cause.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is caused by wound, section, cauterization, or other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal canal on the left to the lacrimal canal on the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And immediately extend the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a spatula of good width.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns to its natural shape as it should, that is good; and otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the cleft figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two fissures be at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and be of their own making angle, such that when they come together, it forms a figure of its own.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And immediately stop the flesh at that point, for the quantity is the thickness of the eyelid below, which is the natural shape.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and immediately cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if echachatry occurs due to fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you open a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid, as was previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And immediately separate with a poultice between two lips, according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of this sermon on the cure of echachatry when it is above or below, which flows into the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of echachatry, and that is in the form of diverse manners.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare skillfully in each possible manner, so that they may return the figure to its natural form or nearly so, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or to the Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many people, it is solidified above the eyelid to the point where the album of the eye, and it hinders the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the end of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards or extend it with a thread.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And immediately you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which is not sharp like the incisions, having only a small obtuseness so that the malady is not disturbed during the operation, and then remove the spatula so as not to disturb the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And may your incision be such that it easily excises that adhesion, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And immediately put into the eye salt water with which you wash it; or distill on it in a gentle manner, dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and place it on the eye infused in albumen of egg, and then use for three days causes that consolidate, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the Incision of the Eyelid and the Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimal Canal.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that an eyelid is according to two ways, for either it is nervous, and resembles a hard, thin ciphac; or it is non-nervous, resembling white humidity congealed, which when iron touches it, becomes hardened and the needle cannot be inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the lacrimal major, and then gradually cover the eye, prohibiting light and movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working in this incision is that the malady puts its head in its place, and immediately opens the eyes of it, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and immediately collects the eyelid with a needle of slight duplication and extends it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And immediately take a needle and insert into it a piece of horse, ox, or cow hide, or something similar, or a strong thread, or duplicate the extremity of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread the eyelid; and extend it to the upper parts, and excise on the edge of the eyelid which sees the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow that with the hide until the very end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And immediately you incise the remainder in the root of the lacrimal canal with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and remove the natural flesh of the lacrimal canal so that through the incision of it no continuous flow of tears may ensue.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some days later the eyelid with the extended needle or thread, as we have said, and immediately excise it with a lion's spatula whose form is this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the spatula and avoid a rupture in that place, lest the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And immediately the incision gets in the eye a little bit of salt or the juice made from sinew, and leave it until the next day; and then cure that with water as needed, until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it taken in that place by the thread, then many times this type of eyelid is cured with medicines, and is healed thus as I have said and recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you will work on the eye of the malady and take a subtle spatula lion with sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if at times that is rarefied and is confused and enters into the root of it, then you will distill from your hand in the eye juice made from sinew or with raw onion or with salt crushed, and cover the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And immediately repeat the operation on that until all that is of it is removed, except for the contrary apostema which is in the eye, because then you will leave it, and cure the apostema at first until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And immediately repeat your operation on that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the eye with great harm, is suspended with a thread; and incise that part of it, and do not finish the incision for fear of continuous flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And immediately distill in the lacrimal juice made from onion and sinew until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the Incision of Algae-like growths and of Water that is born from flesh adjusted in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some times in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or strengthens on the eyelids and lightly presses them against the parts above and is assembled like a rose window.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this case is that the malady puts its head in its place; and immediately opens the eyes of that and collects all that flesh with suitable thread, and tie it with a forceps or with a basket; and immediately incises the flesh at first until all is finished with the needle, and be careful not to disturb the eye lest you spoil your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be the incision with which you incise those or with a spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the eyelid, or with small forceps with which it is collected according to the form that comes closest to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And thus when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with crushed salt, or distill in it a red powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place on the eye above a thin layer of albumen of egg to ensure against apostema.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of algae-like growths is present and is Lord of the sanguineous apostema caution, and you fear apostema caution, then leave the eye alone and cure that apostema with water which dissolves that apostema, and immediately repeat the operation on that until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But however you must know that alienates all cure of the eye by way of natural or accidental means, work with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member is capable of that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Sabellum in the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabel is a reddish-colored vein which forms knots on the eye and prevents the eyelid from performing its operation, and opens up the eye along with length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the eye in which the sabel is present is strong and in it there is no other disease besides sabel, then you collect that sabel.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the malady to put its head in its place, and immediately suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your prudence; and be that thread of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two threads gradually woven into one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And immediately those veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from the eye and turned back.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not touch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be steadfast in your operation so as to incise only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you will distill in the eye juice of green or red onion so that with its sharpness it may corrode the water that is removed from the sabel.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you, then collect all of it in that hour, and immediately apply all the water that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is sedated and is ensured against caution.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And immediately repeat on it in the same manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the Reduction of Arthritis to the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arthritis with cauterization or acute medicine as it is preceded by the narrative of it and does not heal, then do not intervene in it but instead make incisions on the apostema of maturity until all the humidity that is in it is extracted and dried out so that the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is exposed and times in it corruption or blackness appears, then you will scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the "aspre cap", and it is made of iron, and its head is rounded like an ash which has been pointed by a lime point or sharpened to a subtle point (such as it is in this form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that on the decayed part of the bone, and immediately turn it between those said points, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this be done several times, and immediately restore the place with drying and purgative causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it and the body of the disease has been cut off and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed and is not apostemated and there is no accident in it, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then do not intervene in it but rather reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you remove a second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, then you take a thread according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Be the extremity of the iron triangular, and the handle of it be first exhausted to the tip just so that it is as if you were to bite it.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And immediately place that on the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and stretch your hand a little further into the eye, and immediately turn your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the malady by which it finds vent to come out so when you pull your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore then restore the place with purgative medicines that dry, just as they were applied.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the material that flowed to the parts above returns to the nose, therefore this is more gentle on the malady.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no accident or diminution in it, then you must relax the malady, and immediately follow, and immediately pause breathing on the neck without scarification and suck for good suction; and immediately place a poultice on the eye which is made of acacia, aloe, and sarsaparilla, and immediately strengthen the application on the eye with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make powder from those.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And immediately place one on top of the other according to the quantity which the eye requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And immediately strengthen on top of those with a strong cloth, and repeat the suction without scarification; and immediately stop the suction and leave the eye straight for a day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament is relaxed, then you must make it tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And immediately stop the ligament for a day and night just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the eye is already reduced, well it is; and otherwise, then immediately repeat the application with powders, ligament, and suction until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Eminence of the Uveal Tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When the tunica uvea becomes disrupptive and protrudes forth between the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and its shape is that of a man for this reason, and you want to incise it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, which is that you insert the needle into the root of the uvea from the left side and above, and immediately place another needle in the double thread part near the lacrimal, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and immediately incise the location of the double thread and lift up with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And immediately extract the needle and place it on the eye lanolin infused in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls away from the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And immediately cure the eye with water that comforts it, until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all the parts with a circle of cloth into the eye adjusted to the great eminence, and immediately be perforated by a subtle spatula that comes before the eye, and flow out the albigenous moisture, and descend the eye and enter soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And immediately strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Cure of Alconatitis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconatitis is nothing but inflammation that is adjusted in the eye resembling descending water and not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working on it is that you make the malady cease upon the prepared and right couch, and immediately take hold of your own head with both hands and bring it down into the part where you see the inflammation reaching, and immediately dry it up so that it does not descend, and stop the light, and the malady sees the causes just as if it saw.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descent of the inflammation with water as we have said, then make the malady cease between your hands and immediately take a subtle spatula and place it on the panniculus cernenting a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic cornea in the crown (until the location is forgotten), until the inflammation is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore when it is forgotten, then you will distill in the eye warm water into which you have mixed honey and water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And immediately be cured by other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Cure of the Descending Water from the Eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable to pierce according to what we declare, then that one according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must make the malady cease between your hands on a cloth and tie up your own eye so that it is very tight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And immediately place your left hand near the eyelid of your own eye if the eye in which the water is flowing is the left one; or with your right hand if it is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And immediately with your right hand take almond, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if it is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And immediately place the extremity of almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and immediately anoint with virtue and turn your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And immediately penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that almond has already penetrated to the desired cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it must be the measure of the path of almond to reach the precursor the measure of space which is that of the pupil from the beginning of darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see with it the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the tunic cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And immediately place almond into the location where the water is, and immediately attract it down once or twice, and therefore if the water descends at once, then you will see the malady cured over which it had its view at once, and almond in your own eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And immediately pause for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you will put aside that other time before almond is exhausted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore when it is dry and no longer descends, then you will extract almond with ease, and turn around with it your hand a little at a time, and immediately dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and with that wash the eye outwardly; and immediately pause outside the eye with cotton or stopper or lanolin infused in rose oil and album of egg white, and tie with water your own eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those of our time place on it a comb made of albumen of eggs.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your almond at the instrument of the eye because of its hardness - for some men have eyes that are very hard - then you must take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce with it that conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, and it is only if you make a way for almond to reach the subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And immediately insert almond according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And complete the complement of your work, be prepared for the sleeping malady to descend in which it will sleep on its own back in a dark house, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of it so that its nature is aligned, and do not upset your head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the ligament according to its disposition for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And immediately release it into that darkest place and expose the most hidden view, and make it see some causes, and immediately return to the ligament on the 7th day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not make this so in the hour of the cures or almost immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They have to be careful that you do not make this so because the water can flow more easily through great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an apostema occurs, then you must release the eye before the 7th day and correct it with water that calms the apostema.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And then you will absolve the vision of it and pause on the face of it orally so that it is guided by it for some days, existing in the darkest place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And immediately be gotten from that dark place gradually and converse with its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in each case, the disciple is not exempt from some vision occasionally, and then you will be bold on the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now it has been reached to us from some of those who are in Artach, and some said that a fire is made in Ayrac, greatly perforated at the place where the water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however, I do not see that in our land which has perfected this, nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaan by which one is above those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And these are made of iron or of bronze properly, and they are the extremities of their own, with this subtlety triangular, the sharp end just like that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Cure of Noxious Flesh in the Nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born various fleshy growths, some of which are caused by a cause resembling Scorpio's heavy weight or Polyp's flesh; and this disease is called Polypus because it resembles that flesh represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, bluish-gray in color; and of it also is the lion's flesh not gray.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is not fraudulent nor cancerous lion's flesh, you must make the malady cease between your hands and place it in the sun, and anoint the nose with it, and pierce it once or twice in those fleshy growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And immediately extract it from the parts above, and immediately insert into that which you have comprehended from those with a sharp subtle spatula of one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; for if there remains any cause by which ablation is possible, then you must ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if there is bleeding or an apostema occurs, then you must pause in that which is necessary; or it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you must cut and cauterize that until the bleeding ceases and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And immediately be gotten in the nose with an incision, either by water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and moisture proceeds from it into the palate, then you will know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that behind it is noxious flesh in the sinuses of the nose which has not been removed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore it is necessary to introduce the point of the needle into that which has some thickness, and push it gently, and pause between each thrust the quantity of the said or more, and generate the malady and introduce one end of the needle into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, that you draw your odorament into the nostrils so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and be exhaled over your gullet, for many times they seem to do this at school, and it is a light cause for him who wants to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And immediately pause the two extremities of the needle, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and immediately administer a closure of flesh with the knots that are in the needle, and do this until you know that the flesh is already bound by the knots of the needle.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And immediately extract the needle, and pause in the nose about the abstraction of blood one quarter, and do this for three days or more until the scab is completely formed over what remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And immediately in the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a leaden cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you degenerate from the cure that exists, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to make a capipurge, with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small open lamp, just like a small shell, and the metal similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument to make a capipurge maker be flat, open; to which there is a handle at the end, with which you can take that when you need it in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes suitable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurgis are precious: recipe of antimony of castor, of white balm, of gingerbread, and saffron, of long pepper, of asafoetida, of hyssop, and anaunced spices. And mix them with the juice of blueberry and of poppy, and make pills, and one pill be tempered with watered tea, and be inserted into the nostrils of the malady as it is situated.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the Worms in the External Parts of the Nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times it is born a worm in the external parts of the nose, and it is magnificent and augmented in several days until its appearance is seen.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you must introduce that into the beginning of its appearance and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And immediately pause over the place or cauterize with medicine which is in the location of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its insertion is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it is calcified, hard, of dark color and little sensation, then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous apostema; for many times the one who inserts this apostema devolves great malice upon the one whom it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the apostema is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and it is possible to insert that into all of it, then evacuate the malady and insert that without fear, and cure the location with what exists and constrains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Suture of the Nose, Lips, and Ears when Continuity is Dissolved by Wound or Similarness.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except among certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you need to treat some cause of those, you must consider whether it is fresh wound with its own blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and immediately cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then you must excise each part of its own codeen that appears until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And immediately adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and on top of those sprinkle blood of dragon and well-trimmed fat, and pause over the powder one piece of emplastrum diaphanic or some other consolidative plaster, and leave that tied for two days or three, and then release that and change that plaster and leave it until the wounds are completely removed, and immediately cure with a scab until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity with needle and thread as I make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Extraction of those Causes that come in the Two Lips in the Parts Behind.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it happens that certain men in the Parts Behind of their Lips have some hard and stubborn apostemas resembling errors, and some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you must convert the lips and fissures each of those hardnesses of all parts, and immediately fill the location with sagacious fat until the blood is restrained, and then be washed with vinegar and be cured the location with what exists and is stiptic, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the Insertion of Adjusted Flesh into the Gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great many times they have said over the gum adjusted flesh which the ancients called albulus, therefore you must suspend that with a needle or that you take that with forceps and insert it as it should be, and let the blood flow or run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And immediately pause over the location with sagacious fat or other powders that are stiptic or excitant.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then immediately reinsert it secondarily, and cauterize it, for immediately after cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the parts behind and those of the front and between the gums, there are adjusted rough, sharp, and some blackened, and some yellowed or greenish, so that the gum is corrupted by it, and the teeth become loosened.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you must make the malady cease between your hands and pause the head of it in its own place, and ratify the teeth on which those roughnesses and causes similar to sand appear, until there is no longer any cause remaining, and do this with the blackness and yellowness and other things so that they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this is the beginning of the reason, good is; and if not, then you must iterate the reason on those for another day and second and third until it reaches the final statement in what you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed many remedies of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, because the remedies with which the tooth is rased from the part behind are different from those with which it is rasped between teeth according to other forms, and these forms of remedies must be prepared by you which you will see at once:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Therefore you must cure the tooth of its pain with all care and attention in every extraction of it, because there is no cause that surpasses the frequency of its occurrence when it is extracted, for it is a subtle substance entering into excuse in the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the malady is firmly seated in that tooth to be extracted, then you must be certain that it is a painful tooth, because many times the pain deceives the malady and claims to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and immediately the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, since you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and when you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in the place where there is some virtue, so that it dissolves from the tooth to the gum of all parts, and then immediately remove it with those said ditz, or with fine forceps little by little until it is extracted.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And immediately grasp in it with great forceps for good speaking or strong extraction, and pause the head of the malady between those said ditz that hold you not to be mauled, and then extract the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the malady.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it deep into the tooth from all parts with facility and effort the removal of it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is bruised or corroded, then it is necessary that you wrap with cloth that bruise and strengthen it with a thin thread at the extremity of a subtle ray so that it is not torn in the hour of your constriction upon it when you take hold.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work with great exactness with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and leave a part of it, and return to the malady for the maliciousness which is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their recklessness and audacity in the extraction of their teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be torn out, and the roots of their remaugudas all or some of those, or that you extract it with some bones from the jawbone just as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And immediately after extraction, wash the mouth with vinegar or lemon juice and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding after this, just like many times there has been, then immediately sprinkle some quantity of rose water and apply it to the wound, and if that rose water does not concur, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine tongs with which the tooth is mauled at the beginning should be one of long extremity, short handle and thick, so that they are not doubled when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And should be like times of thick handle so that when you strain with those, they are not doubled, having short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And should be made of Indian iron with descending shapes and right angles, and in the extremities of those, there are teeth which fit into each other and strain by construction descent strong, and some times the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, so it is guarded, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Extraction of Teeth and Dislocation of the Bones of the Mandibles Broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract the tooth which is broken due to some cause, then it is necessary that you pause over the location with border for one day or two until the location is mollified; and immediately introduce algid or tongs into the extremities of those which are assembled at the beak of a bird called ciconia or guard, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them are made behind like a file or alfalfa.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your eye to these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary that you dig into the root and uncover all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name of atali, so it is a small lever whose form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be short with a large extremity and a little one, and not entangled, so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, good is; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and with a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already help yourself with this instrument having two prongs of which this is the form approaching the next:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in scraping of teeth; for already it is made with this instrument which is similar to once great, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of a triangular extremity bent or short, which has some thickness, and not entangled, so that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And also know that the instruments of teeth many are so and similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisans in the art find for themselves by trial and error according to what each operation and diverse illnesses mean; for they are of illnesses to which the ancients did not say nor pause with proper instruments, due to the forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it becomes disjointed, then immediately apply gentle pressure on that place where it is convenient for instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with gestures such as this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And be in that place some thickness gradually, and be strung or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone there is a small fracture, then immediately break that into pieces and cure it with its blackness, and heal that until it is well.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Cure of Teeth Elevated above Others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are elevated and not according to their natural form, and more so when they involve women, and most especially venerable girls; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is very close to another tooth, and there is no possibility of suture or ligament of it, then immediately remove that one; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you must insert it with this instrument which has the form of a pig's jawbone, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And be your insertion with which you insert it in many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not like another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the elevated tooth is exposed to erosion, then immediately file it with a file made of Indian iron which has this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And be all of Indian iron and its margin well-shaped; and be with many small points like a file which is made of hairpins, by which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with ease, so that it is not another tooth deformed and spoiled.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line it up at the end, and break it off with some rasors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken and the tongue lies on it, then it is necessary that you file it down until the sharpness of that fracture is removed and smoothed, and filled in so that the tongue does not lie on it nor corrupt the word.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Deformed Teeth with Gold or Silver Wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the malady cannot be strengthened over that which remains, and you have treated it with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then because they do not decay immediately, it is necessary to strengthen them with a gold wire and not silver, for silver becomes green and soon becomes loose, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the wire is in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recitation is that you take the wire and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two turns of the wire between two deformed ones, or if only one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the treatment until you reach the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not deformed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be your traction by which you tighten the wire on the roots of the teeth that do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then insert the superfluous extremities of the wire with forceps or tweezers, and add them to each place with gestures, and convert them and conceal them between the healthy tooth and the deformed one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen it just as stretched tight.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that one or those with another wire in such a manner for all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the recitation of two healthy teeth and two deformed ones, just as these linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one returns or two nearby the falling of each in its place, and are reborn just as we have recounted, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled artisans can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow bones, and is made from them in the form of a tooth, and is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and is strengthened just as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Insertion of the Ligament Which is in the Tongue and Prohibits Speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which is left behind the tongue sometimes or is natural to it and which one has not, or accidental and occurs by injury that is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the malady, its own head being situated in your tongue; and raise your tongue, and then insert that nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its recency.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that there is some hardness or nodulation, and this is fixed by the consolidation of injury, then you must gently loosen it and cut through with latitude until you have dissected the ligament and dissolved the nodulation.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not a fissure made in the forehead of the flesh, and that you do not cut here archery and bring forth a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then be washed the vestige of the incision with warm water or vinegar, or with lukewarm water; and then pause for a moment after the tongue is freed; thus is the manner which holds the malady from the tongue in every night so that it will not consolidate again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the location with a poultice made from vinegar; but if the blood flows, then immediately cauterize the location with a caustic lint which corresponds to this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of Ranula Left Behind the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes a swelling appears behind the tongue, resembling a small tumor that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and very little is magnified until it fills up the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the malady, sitting in front of the sun and considering the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if it is a dark or black, hard lump that the malady does not sense, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you must put the once into it, and insert that with a subtle spatula, and dissect all around; and if blood flows on the hour of your operation, then pause for a moment above a poultice made from vinegar, so that the blood may be restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it in its entirety, so that it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with the other cure corresponding to this, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of Swellings from Two Ears and that which is nothing in the Groin and other Swellings.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is a swelling in the groin, so are the glands which are assembled together, which swell up and are named two ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you must consider whether the swelling is hard, of dark color, and of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; before let that one ripen, and then either you will break it or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, rounded, and the root of it is subtle, then that one must be dissected.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling of it has rested or not, and whether it has rested completely or diminished by some diminution; and then make the patient sit down before the sun, with his head in its own place, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, left behind an instrument very noble which is as follows:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And be made of silver or iron, and be subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you take the tongue and it is shown to you the swelling, and gaze upon that with your own eyesight, then take the once and place that in the amnion, and pull that out as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or else, another cause that pulls some of the tunics, and then insert it with an instrument which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the end of the other, very sharp, made of Indian iron well-enough.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then insert it with a spatula which has this form of it: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have dissected one notch, then insert the other in the same manner of insertion, and immediately apply the insertion to the malady with lukewarm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, apply lukewarm water of decoction of scorzonera or myrtle leaves and similar to that of the stiptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure that one until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes you find other swellings in the groin besides those two ears, and dissect those according to what I have said in the dissection of two notches with a spatula.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman who had a swelling in her groin which was turning black, of little sensation, which had closed up the groin of hers, and the woman was breathing with great difficulty, and had already prohibited herself from eating and drinking water, and was on the point of death if you had not acted within a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the swelling had grown so much that it had opened up two holes, through which pus was flowing through two channels.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore you must proceed fisturally and get stuck in one of them once, and pull that out, and as it comes forth with a great piece, and then you insert the other once into the understanding of the other channel, and then you force the mouth open, and grasp its tongue, and then you place the once in that swelling.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And immediately you cut off a great part of it, and there was only a little blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the groin of that woman was completely healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then you prescribed food for her, so that you did not cease to dissect that swelling many times over a long period, and successive swellings occurred in the same place, which were dissected until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore I generated this and caused the groin of her to be cauterized, thus adding a new element; and then I walked away and did not know what God had done for that one with me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Dissection of an Uterus when it is Swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh settles in the uterus, and it is swollen and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is on the left side big and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree, and if only sometimes that swelling again becomes a lump of it and is subtle, then you must dissect those which are aggregated round; and if it is as long as that, and it is sanguine, of dark color or black, and has no sensation, then you must tremble at the dissection of it, for in that there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you take that one according to the manner which I have said of its whiteness and length, so that you make the patient sit down and press the tongue with an instrument whose form is as follows: and immediately place the once in the newness, and pull that down and dissect it with one of two instruments which are said in the dissection of two notches.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you must not dissect that one unless it is adjusted to the natural term with an addition, for if you dissect more than that, you will deprive yourself of your own speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the dissection, use what we have recommended in the dissection of two notches, and cure that one until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the dissection of it, then you must use cunning in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cauterizer in it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you pause the head of the patient in its own place, and immediately press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and immediately take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm with it a living cause, and pause it not dense nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	So that the extremity of it is in the concavity where the medicine is paused just as the concavity of a spoon is, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the vulva, and the patient will stretch out his hand over his own lap for so that the saliva or mastication of the mouth of that one will come forth by the intrinsic medicine, in order that it may not descend from any cause upon the groin of it and corrupt that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take your hand and the medicine, and press that upon the uvula for the space of a quarter hour until you see it to be darkened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap that around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube on top so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then release it when it becomes dry and falls away three or four days later.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then apply the cauterization abstergent in the circuit of the uvula with a cloth wrapped around it, and clarify with that what is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and be washed with lukewarm water, and be cured externally with embrocation, and internally with gargling until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more saved than dissection and more free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and dissection, for it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, saffron, origanum, ruda, Arabic gum, camomile, and similar herbs to those, and combine all those causes or some of them into a pot, and let them be submerged in lukewarm water, and boil; and the pot is well stirred with decent stirring, and there is a hole in the middle of the pot, on which is placed an instrument made of iron or silver according to this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity is inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the tongue, until the uvula becomes very darkened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this many times until it is dry, and be careful not to do this cure at the beginning of the appearance of swellings, for too much would settle in the swelling, and you must not do that, but rather declare the swelling of it beforehand.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you don't have this instrument, then take a reed and shape it at the extremity of it into a stopper of wood, so that the mouth of the patient is blocked, for the stopper of wood prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the Extraction of Thorns and that which adheres in the groin and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times it adheres in the groin or thorn of a pea or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then it is necessary that you extract what appears from those things which are visible to the eye, for as you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the groin.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the groin, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, because very soon the cause annexed to the groin will be forgotten by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or root of lettuce or a small loaf of bread; or take a piece of marine sponge, and bind it tightly with twine, and then make the patient swallow it, so that when it reaches the place where the thorns are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And then take an eel and bind it tightly with twine, and have it placed inside and slowly extracted; or take a basket and have it placed inside and slowly taken out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And be more thick than a small reed, and in the extremity of it be a concavity which you insert into its groin with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And it raises its head upwards and be careful that the touch of its bone in the throat, for so that it may discover the body and with that which enters into the bone or spine, or that it places itself in its own hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But then the patient that inserts is honey, by its knowledge of the location of the annexed cause and enters in below, and pulls out its hand with the instrument on it, all according to the quantity which is prepared at it until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of Blood-sucking Worms attached to the groin.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood-sucking worm is medicated with what we have said in the division of cures with medicines and it does not agree, consider then in the groin of the patient to the sun, because you have grasped the tongue of it with an instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find the blood-sucking worm, extract it with a small once or with subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it, then take a concave tube and insert that into the groin of the patient, and then pause in the concavity of the tube an iron heated instrument, and do this many times (until the blood-sucking worm is dead and falls out of the groin) and abstain from giving water to the patient for all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vial full of lukewarm water, and open the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause pass through that and murmur at the water for an hour afterwards by its own hand, because the blood-sucking worm will soon come to sense the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cinnamon or with assafetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will come to be so.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And this is another way of operation in subfumigation, that you take a pot with burning coals and the pot be covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument be placed in that hole; and then proceed to subfumigate; and pause the patient's mouth on the extremity of the tube, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood-sucking worm, for the blood-sucking worm will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not catch, then you repeat the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving water to the patient, and give him salty causes and herbs, and do not let him drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood-sucking worms are extracted from the groin when it is visible; and it resembles forceps like those, except that it has some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the groin, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is grasped, with a lime-like point, for so that when you compress any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in warning of swellings and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The swellings are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And so diverse in their perforation and section by two manners, of which one is by the species of swellings themselves; and therefore that we compress from the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper to the places where accidents occur in the body, for the swelling that occurs in the head is another than the swelling that occurs in the tail; and the swelling that occurs in the fleshy part is another than the swelling that occurs at the joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some swellings are such that they should not be perforated, but rather allowed to mature with the pus in those or its completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other swellings are such that they should be pierced when they are crossed, and not mature according to their completion, just like swellings that are proper to joints. For a swelling that occurs near a joint, the matter of it is prolonged until it pours out what is in its circuit, and then the bonds or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is a swelling proper to the main member, and if you delay perforation of it until it becomes mature on the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce it unripe. Do not pierce it when it is ripe with non-completed digestion, but only that which is proper to the anus, so that it does not pour forth its contents and be elongated towards the outer parts of the anus, causing a fistula, or that it become in its term what is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the hour of piercing the swelling, and that is when it is mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is mature when there is the yielding of pain and the ceasing of fever, and accordingly the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpness of the tip of the swelling, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And therefore you must know that the piercing should take place in the most distant part of the swelling and from the coming forth of the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should be done through the length of the flesh or the body, if the swellings are in the parts of the muscles or of the fat, and in places of the lacertae, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the swelling is in a fleshy part, then it is better that you delay the piercing of it until it is confirmed by the digestion of it according to its completion, just as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus will be prolonged and many foul humors will be brought forth, and therefore the lips of it will become hardened and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some swellings should be pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or body, as necessity demands, or according to that which the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small piercing, and in large swellings, a large piercing and wide or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the swellings.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of swellings in which the cord should be concave and indented, when it is made thus as if bread and cheese were placed together, just like those that occur in troops of dubeclets and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are indented with a section having three angles; and of those is one which is indented just like the figure of a myrtle leaf, just like the swellings of the gangrene.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those which are indented with a round section and a lunar-shaped section, and resemble them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one which is not like the others, such as superficial swellings of the lion, should be pierced with a superficial or flat piercing only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And you should know that when the swelling is large and has collected much pus, you must pierce it and not worry about extracting all the pus at once; having extracted one part, prop up the swelling until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and do this many times according to graduation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most especially if the patient is of a fragile constitution, or a woman in childbirth, or a child, or an old person in decrepitude; for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the excretion of pus, and therefore the patient dies quickly, and you must operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and accordingly administer your piercing in which you pierce these swellings, so that you cleanse the plagues and consider then whether the plague of the swelling is slight, or it is a flat section; therefore you must administer some of old wine or vinegar; and if the swelling is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause in each hole until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the swelling is abscessed a part of the cord or has concavated it in the circuit, then you must fill it with old cloth or a thread made of linen, just as when you have drained pustules or boils, with their moisture; and strengthen that within three days; and accordingly process that and cure it with what is needed from the poultices until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during the hour of your operation, then you must administer lukewarm water and vinegar to the places where a linen cloth is wrapped around it, and pause that over the place of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer a regimen and cure, and powder the ones which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the swelling is a place of many nerves, then you must envelop powders in vinegar and oil carefully, and pause them on those places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you must pause powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all that be hot within three days, just as we have said, and then you must loosen the swelling and cleanse that and administer to it what is needed for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is this what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of swellings universally, but according to the way of distinction which I have said for each swelling in a particular manner by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the Section of Swellings which occur on the Cord of the Head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cord of the head, small swellings occur, and of species of nodes which contain tunics that are to their uses; and the species of these are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pustules, and those which contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those which contain moisture resembling powder, and similar to theirs; and those which are lithoid, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, as you should extract them so that the extraction does not cause constriction of the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of these is that you express them with an instrument whose shape approaches thus, which is called "entromes", until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if what is contained is moisture, then you must divide it into sections according to its length, by a superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins at the section of the line .B. up to the line .G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you must excoriate that which contains that moisture, and not leave any cause behind, for many times it returns, if there remains some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And accordingly, you must submerge it in an Egyptian poultice, if present, or else in water and salt; and fill it with that poultice and leave it until the next day, for by this, all that remains of that peel will be corroded.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, you must iterate over that poultice with an Egyptian poultice secondly and thirdly if needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that peel; then cure the wound with a poultice until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the swelling contains fatty nodes, then you must incise it in this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	by section having the form of a cross, and cut once between two lips of the section and scrape that away from all part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery is constricted, then do what I have recounted first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do with the lithoid swelling of section and cure according to what we have said; and section over lithoid swelling is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some of these swellings which are in the head of certain old men who have little moisture; and this cause is because you incised over one swelling on the head of an old woman and afterwards struck the swelling with a sordid, asperous, white hammer that could not be bent, and if it touched any part, it would wound.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other accidental swellings on the head, this is not this chapter, as are the swellings that occur on the heads of children and in the ears, but the section of these all shall be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the piercing of those in the lower part of them, so that it may be alleviated the body of the pus to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And accordingly cure those with what is needed for their cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the Section of Scrofulae which occur in the Neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these swellings occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those which occur in the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is dissolved into its own tunic, just like in the nodes and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulae are many, for some are lithoid, and some that contain moisture, and some malignant which do not yield to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to be of good disposition in the Tocament, whose color is manifest and is related to the color of the cord, and is spread out to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not preponderant, you must incise it with a superficial section from the upper part of the body down to the lower part of the body along the line .G. up to the line .B., and scrape away that entire part, and extend two lips of the cord with an oncus or with many onci if you have need of them, just as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the spatula is not sharp enough, that it does not adjust to your touch and inscision, or that it annoys the patient, and you incise something that is not necessary to be incised; for if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound, and sprinkle vitriol or other powders which stop bleeding, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the swelling subsides and the wound becomes soft and begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is abscessed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And accordingly, inquire about the sign that your teacher has indicated whether there remains any cause of other small scrofulae, therefore incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the great scrofula, then beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Beware that you leave it alone with a doubled force and let it fall of its own accord, without causing any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And accordingly fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in an Egyptian poultice, and accordingly cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and close it as soon as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there remains some superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then beware that you understand how to incise the root of it, and extract it and administer suturing and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And as for the scrofulae that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial piercing at the location where you see the spot of maturation, and pause in the piercing so that the pus drains from the lower part of the body, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And accordingly administer piercing, with poultices and similar substances to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, when you see the wound already cleansed, then you must cure it with a poultice of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the Section of the Pithotomy of the Accidental Swelling that occurs in the Gullet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this section as the "Epilhot", and it is not seen in our land that anyone has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have squintiness, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because through this the veins and main arteries of the patient are all here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have swellings caused by caustics in the mouth or gullet or ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to use the section of epilhot to flee from the destruction which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to do this, let us incise the epilhot below three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with small section by latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for a section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood are hollow.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is hesitant, then beware that he extends the cord of the gullet with an oncus, and accordingly makes an incision in the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And accordingly incise the ciphac according to what we have recounted; and it is signified above the section of the canal by the flame which is from that very thing, mixed with water that is broken down and by the abscess of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is come in which perforation is feared, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and close it alone except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And let Albucasis say that the summary of the sermon which we have recounted is nothing but that you see some of those swellings have filled up the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the voice of life is extinct, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the location of the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and it is the malice of life for three days; and then command to close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this which I have seen by my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and put it in his own gullet and incised with it a part of the tube of the lung, and you were called to the cure of him, and he began to cough as the dead are coughed out, and uncovered the wound and brought forth the blood which was situated in the small part.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you were confessed that it had not cut a vein nor an artery, and the breath was from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And there was not an accident with the servant, except that he became hoarse in his voice, and accordingly some days returned to improvement of his physical condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say to you that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the Section of the Swelling which occurs in the Gullet outside, and is called Hernia of the Gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling, named hernia of the gullet, is a great swelling according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, whether it be natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to grassy nodes, and the other manner is similar to a swelling caused by constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make presumptions about it except in the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you proceed with that and investigate it according to what is said, and if you find it similar to grassy nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise it as with the nodes, and extract it with water which contains the peel and bursicles; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly examined, and accordingly cure the location where it needs healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the Section of the Species of Nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, many species and you have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence, lest there be doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore you say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity subsides; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cephac lion which is at the proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cheese and it is made thus as a void, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, whether they be grassy and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, beware that you expose it and inquire into it at the beginning with a gentle instrument called an intro-mess, according to what its form will come in the chapter which is appropriate to this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiry into swellings and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place which you find in the swelling, and you rotate those things said with it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And accordingly, finally, your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the swelling, and accordingly extract the intro-mess and consider what is situated in its track.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humidity has flowed out, of whatever color it may be, then you will incise it with a superficial section according to what I have said in other swellings.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the track of the intro-mess there is no humidity, then you know that it is grass.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut above it with a section having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Just as you have been taught, and suspend it with an oncus, and excoriate the cord of all parts with ease, and preserve the peel or sac, if possible, above it and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, then it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times there will be an opening above, and accordingly you will extract it by piecemeal until there is no longer any cause from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from it there remains no cause, little or much, the node will return to its original state.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that from it remains a small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause above it where the swelling is cautious, and cure it by another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you will close the two lips of it and cure it with water that nourishes.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is on the contrary, or non-pulsatile, then you will cut and hollow out the location of the three-fold wound that is filled with vitriol and leave it straight for two days or three until the wound becomes putrid and the ebullition of blood subsides; and accordingly return to incise what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the Forms of the Instruments Necessary in Section and Perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, the forms of intro-messes are three species, that some are great, and some medium, and some small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the great intro-mess is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium-sized intro-mess is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small intro-mess is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, with a handle of wood or bone, and extremities curved decently, so that the instrument may be introduced into swellings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are named by name, and one of them is called Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, that some are great, some medium, and some small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experimenter is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized experimenter is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experimenter is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	And thus it is fitting that they be for those swellings, excrescences, and fistulas, and buboes, because among them are those of bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus they are made rounded, thick, and lions, just like large needles with which the scales are sewn, and they are made of terra cotta, or iron, or silver, And the best ones are when they are made of terra citta.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made by experimenters of black lead, which they agree that for those, the fistulas should be opened in the convergence of the reflections, which should be reflected into their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, that some of them are long, and others medium-sized, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the great experimenter of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized experimenter of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small experimenter of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the onuses are many species, that some of them are simple, to which is only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them are onuses of iron, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are onuses that have two curvature, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are onuses that have three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a great simple onus, form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple onus:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple onus, form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an iron great onus:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of an iron medium-sized onus, form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of an iron small onus, form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a great onus having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized onus having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small onus having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a great onus having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized onus having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small onus having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which nodes and swellings are cut and excised, and there are three species, that some are great, others medium-sized, and others small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and others not sharp, and are not so paused in such a way that it may be done jointly in the excision of nodes, so as to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and through these the patient may be healed and restored to tranquility, somewhat for the adjustment which finds fault with the excision of the swelling.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of ligatures, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small, just like veins.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of a great ligature:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium-sized ligature:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small ligature:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of terra cotta and resemble a ray with which alcohol is distilled.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it has on the extremity a pierced point with a hidden spatula and in that corner there are partitions inside and outside, when you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the said parts of the perforation of swellings and do not touch the patients, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventoses with which the flow of blood is drained off, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small; the forms are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of terra cotta, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that you have these species of ventoses, great, medium-sized, and small, so that through them the flow of blood may be drained off with speed in need, and thus when your patient's condition is not yet medicated.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you do not use those to drain blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, just like in the armpits and groins, and in the armpits of the breasts, belly, and groin, and similar to their fleshy hummocks.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times they are made of those small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; through which the blood is drained when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times they are made rounded according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men which are assembled like those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflated just as they begin to be relaxed, and accordingly the breasts are swollen, and assembled like those of women, and apostemous, distant.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has this condition, you should incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and accordingly excise the entire hardness, and accordingly fill the wound with flesh-colored medicine, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast descends to its natural parts and is softened by its own magnitude just like in women, then it should be cut into two halves with a slight surplus on each side, with two sections resembling the shape of the moon, where each one contains the end of the other, until the major line contains the minor one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And accordingly excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and the powders that are necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which should be cut because of the anxiety of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive gall and leave it until the corrosion that remains from the grayish color has disappeared, and accordingly cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of swellings that come from left behind the titillate.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those swellings that come from left behind the titillate are of the species of scrofulas, which contain a sack.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of those contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the swelling, then you must fill it with old cotton and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly the cotton should be left to stay and be cured with suitable gall, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the swelling is of the species of nodes or scrofulas, then you should cut into it just as we have said in the section on scrofulas, equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it caustic according to what we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of swellings that occur by artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken and the cord is consolidated which is above it, many times a swelling occurs And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and swelling are due to the artery or vein: for when the swelling is from the artery, it is long extended in the region of the chest; and when you apply pressure with those said things, you will feel in it what is called stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from the vein is rounded to the visible part of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this swelling is an error, and more so in those that are left behind the armpits, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be prevented.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is from the artery due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, you should cut into the cord in the long section; and accordingly cut the section with scissors and accordingly open up the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And accordingly make an incision on that aglet and cause it to penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with a double thread in two places, — which is the reason why you should have your eye sight in extracting two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And accordingly push the place that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is let out and the swelling is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly administer treatment in which pus is generated until the ligaments fall apart; and accordingly cure that with suitable gall until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the swelling is due to section of vein, then you should take with your hand as much of the swelling and cord as possible from the swelling and cord, and accordingly introduce the aglet behind the place where you have kept your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that file double so that you can extract what is on the other side, and accordingly bind the swelling with a single ligament just as I have told you to do with two parts and two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread may break, then accordingly introduce the thread with that aglet behind all the swelling before making the incision of the first needle, and strengthen those threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And accordingly cut the swelling in the middle of it so that when what is there is removed, you will then incise the surplus of the cord and leave what remains tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly put on the poultice which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and accordingly administer the treatment which is made with some and gall until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter LX of the swelling that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as swellings occur in the artery and vein, and similarly swellings occur in nerves when they are pierced or twisted excessively, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is caused by the greatest of all in the areas of the assistants or of the tibia, or in any place where the joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a grave swelling, and it is similar in color to the other body parts, and it occurs in the areas of greatest disposition for its formation and when it is stretched with great intensity, as if the patient were struck with stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not a swelling that is aggregated in the chest, and therefore it remains behind the cord, and it is affected to all parts and does not go to the anterior or posterior regions.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, what is in the joints should not be treated with iron, because it would cause too great a contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or forehead can be opened up with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small swelling, then you should use the forceps and cut it off at the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you should suspend it with scissors, and excise that part, and accordingly stop the bleeding; and adjust the wound with stitches, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LXI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of swelling which occurs in the cheek that occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	I have found in some men many times in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungous by similarity to those with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the top is thick; and already the lips of these are conversed, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I myself have seen one, and in its belly there were two theils that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between them in their white color, with very subtle roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from it at all times.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise them and cut into the one in pieces of eighteen ounces. and the other piece weighs seven ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider now if the patient is humid, and the color of their theil is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you should cut them open with a spatula, and have in your presence some caustic in the fire, because many times the section of it is expelled much blood; and if you find blood, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is poor and timid, beware of incising with iron; but rather take a lead thread freshly made and strengthen it on that theil, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And accordingly adjust it in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly on that theil, until it is cut off and falls away from its excessive labor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the theil is of great roots, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and dread, and even more so in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But possible it is that you cut out most of it, and accordingly cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And accordingly cure that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to cut out a theil which is of dark color, with little sensation, and having no regard, for it is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I have found in my recollection a sign accordingly.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LXII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Prominence of the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the cicatrix which is above the belly, and eyes of it are torn or burst forth according to what develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from vein or artery as has been said before, or by ventral constriction.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to fissure of the cicatrix and bursting forth of the skin, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; and there is no great pain, but rather an appearance of diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to protrusion of the budel, then the situation of that with water which we have recounted, and with more violent diversity, and as you press that with the said threads it is hidden, and accordingly returns; and very soon it becomes so, and is greatly magnified by the introduction of bath and intense labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if due to humidity, then it is so loose and not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or creased.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then accordingly with these signs the swelling appears declining towards blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to nothing but flesh, then accordingly it is a great and large swelling, hard and firm, and fixed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to constriction, then accordingly the touch of it is loose.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider now if the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or constriction; accordingly it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because there is fear and dread just as I have taught you in the chapter where I said about swellings caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the budel or skin, then accordingly you should command the patient to hold his belly in one hand and be standing upright; and accordingly send someone with a tent in the circuit of all the navel, and accordingly command him to stand between your hands on either side of his belly, and accordingly circle with a spatula wide enough around the navel at the place you have marked with the tent; and accordingly extend most of the swelling towards the upper parts with scissors great; and accordingly tie it in the circuit with strong thread or with cord, and the manner of tying decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And accordingly make an incision in the middle of the swelling extended over the ligament and introduce the said thread into that indicated and seek out the budel; and if you have not found nor guarded it by the ligament, then you should extract the thread and push the budel towards the parts behind the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then accordingly take it with scissors; and cut out the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then accordingly circle around that spot, and accordingly return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and enter two needles into the circuit which you have made around the swelling in a cross-like manner, which will make them penetrate; and accordingly strengthen the swelling in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the place until the flesh extended and falls away on its own; or cut it when it is softened and becomes pliable, and accordingly cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture in that place, then accordingly it is necessary for you to conquer the swelling as we have said and remove the blood or moisture which you find there, and accordingly cure that with water as needed and consolidate the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LXIII.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division, about the kind of cancer and how it is to be cured with medicines, and that it is advisable not to use iron for its cure so as not to ulcerate; and we have also said that cancer is generated in the majority of cases through carelessness and caution in its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just like the cancer which is on the nipples or in the armpits and similar to those members allocated to remove all that, and most of all when it is beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and great, it is not possible for you to take ownership of it, because you cannot heal from that place or disease, nor have I seen another way, nor one that has reached its end.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in this case is when it is allocated as we have said, which is that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black cholera several times, and accordingly bind up that part if it is found to be manifestly full.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And accordingly prepare the patient with preparation for the operation, and accordingly prohibit from entering the wound with scissors that are needed for that; and accordingly excavate all parts with a cord so good as possible excision, until there remains no cause for the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut too deeply, and remove the clots, and wash away the great deal of blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find great opposition from the blood flow in an incision of a vein or artery, then accordingly cauterize that place until the bleeding has ceased, and accordingly cure that with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LXIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, about the kinds of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each kind, as well as the cure of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not but the species of althitis alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypoarchae, for this is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of dropsy timpanistre with medicines and your treatment has not been effective, then accordingly consider, for if the patient is already weakened or has another disease, such as in the lungs or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear is great over this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be in good health, with no other disease but dropsy alone, and not young or old, then accordingly the manner of the operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give them appropriate medicine, and empty the belly of water with their own hand, filling the partition next to the pentenilh, and accordingly take a spatula with spines in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	to be of two sharp parts long, with an acute extremity just like a spatula; but however it should have some brief smallness little by little, in order that in the operation on that part you do not go too far into the belly and leave it there.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And accordingly consider if the generation of dropsy is from one of the bellies, for then it is necessary that you with the section go away from the navel by three times this distance to the parts left behind, on the right side of the belly over the pentenilh.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then accordingly your section should be on the left side of the navel by three times this distance.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the kidneys, then accordingly your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary that your section be on the side opposite to which the patient wishes to lie down, so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And accordingly pierce the entire cord with an instrument, and accordingly enter into that section, and lift your hand with a spatula between the cord and the sphincter, and you excise that part; and if it is about the length of a fingernail or thereabout.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And accordingly pierce the sphincter until the spatula reaches the location where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And accordingly extract that and enter an instrument which has this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver tube; it is made of silver or lead or bronze, at which in the lower part of the bottom is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is cut off according to the manner of a feather, just as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the tip of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that ring will immediately be placed over the instrument, therefore evacuating from the water in the middle quantity, lest if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, soon the patient will die from resolution of their animal spirit, or else you will cause them to faint and it is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from it according to the quantity of the virtue of it, and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's pulse and the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And accordingly extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it to be retained by the cord that holds the hole which is above the sphincter of which I have recounted to you that you should pierce it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And accordingly repeat the instrument to the other day if you find that the patient can tolerate this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do so for several days over fear, and beware of mistake until there remains only a little water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and leave a great quantity of water, then accordingly cure that with burial in hot sand, and moisten with bath, and wait under the sun for a long time; and cure that with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the kidneys and liver accordingly with the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted earlier.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LXV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born with undescended kidneys that do not perforate.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	At times, one of the children is born from the womb of its mother and the head of its mixture is not perforated (or has a very narrow hole or is not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform an operation on the child as soon as it is born with a spatula that is very fine and subtle in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And accordingly pause in the hole a small lead clasp and tie it up, and let it stay for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it wants to urinate be released and flow; and accordingly return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the place will not close this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that of which the hole is narrow should be treated with a lead clasp, just as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the hole is not in its place are led astray, which cause is because of them, that one who is born and the tract is twisted is due to the end of the head of the scrotum so that it cannot urinate into the parts behind, until it lifts up the scrotum with its hand to the parts above; and it is not a generation, therefore the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a disease very grievous.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on his back, and accordingly extend the head of the scrotum with your left hand with a vehement extraction, and cut off the head of the head of the scrotum at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, just as one cuts off a feather or some part, so that the middle part of it becomes like the head of the scrotum, and the hole falls into the middle place according to what is necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, for many times this happens; and pause at the place where you will cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the disease of which it occurs in the prepuce at the head of the scrotum, and of corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the scrotum.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this disease occurs in the scrotum and is a prominence of soft flesh, very grievous.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, requires that you suspend it with a fine thread and cut off the part until all the excess is removed; and accordingly pause above the wound covered in Egyptian ointment; and accordingly treat it with ointment day by day until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the disease is malignant, with dark color, then accordingly you should administer caustics around the incision and the edge of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the disease is in the prepuce of the head of the scrotum that is not circumcised, and one part of the disease is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then accordingly you should remove the diseased part that is inside first, until it is consolidated; and then you will cure that which is outside, for when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And thus also it occurs in the genitals and in the prepuce blackness and corruption, therefore you should conquer all that which is already corrupted and which already wishes to corrupt or has already been corrupted; and accordingly line over that with a mixture of honey and flour made from scoria of millet grain and well-crushed and well-sifted errors.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And accordingly cure that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is excessive bleeding, then accordingly administer lunar caustics in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for lunar caustics are beneficial in two dispositions together, namely in bleeding and in the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the scrotum is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then accordingly you should insert a lead tube into the meatus of the prepuce, so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the scrotum (and this adhesion only occurs in one whose prepuce is thick and no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) you should excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the scrotum is freed from all part.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excise them precisely, then accordingly you should excise with a spatula some cause from the head of the scrotum and the prepuce, and thus is why the prepuce, when thin, is perforated by its own subtlety little by little.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And accordingly separate between the prepuce and the head of the scrotum with a thread of fine silk, which has been moistened in water so that they do not adhere to each other again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And accordingly be treated with vinegar spirits until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the treatment of that which occurs in them after circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other wounds: but rather it is a part of our operation and our will, and its purpose is properly in children. It is necessary that we assign the best possible operation and way to proceed, losing no time for the sake of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not dictate circumcision in any of their free books, for they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why you have found that most of the artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a razor and with fire; and they use a thread to bind and an incision to mark.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already forbidden all these methods and did not find better purification with razors, with thread and fire that is like the mark of a finger, because many times the cord above has been cut off, since the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and the tone below remains, and it is soon forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification made by the Alphatecians, which is digital, and used by the surgeons, it is not ensured that the incision of the extremity of the male member is secure, because soon it will enter into the tract of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a finger, iron soon causes obstruction and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times they are born in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But from the purification that is made with razors and threads and fire, I have discovered by experience that it is not good, for the razors are of proportionate incision, so that the sharpness above is as sharp as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportionally two sharpnesses, and inscribe them together in a single moment; and it is made a compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the scrotum on all sides, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child as comfortable as possible, especially if it is one of those who understand little; and do not do more than simply tie the thread in its scrotum so tightly that it will not come undone until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And accordingly make the child happy in all that manner which is possible to you, according to how it receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And accordingly make the child sit between your hands most carefully prepared, and not be at all anxious; and conceal the razors in your hand or beneath your cloak, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And accordingly place your hand on the scrotum of him and blow into the cord, and pull it in until it is reached the head of the scrotum; and accordingly purify that which has accumulated there through impurities.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And accordingly tie the marked spot with double thread, and accordingly bind another small thread below that as a second ligature; and accordingly take care of the said point and indicate to yourself the location of the left ligature with good retention, and inscribe between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly lift the cord slightly and extract the head of the scrotum; and accordingly let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and pause powdered powder above and on top of the powdered powder, and pause a cloth in which is spread a yolk of hen cooked in water with roasted oil recently boiled; and lay that over that until the next day; and cure that with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the razors for purification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	May the outer edges not be cutting and the other side be cutting, so that there is no space left at the tip of the claw, and may the length of both sharpnesses be as long as the length of two arms equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that soon you will cut away the entire inner cord or a part of it, which should be incised.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, I say that you should stretch that of your hour with your finger before the abscess of the wound and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then accordingly extract that with a thread and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the abscess has not burst open below the scrotum, then accordingly you should let it be until the abscess is fully formed, and excise that with ease, and incise that according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the scrotum, for it will not be affected by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And thus cure that with the powder that has been consolidated, according to the recipes that we have recounted in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised according to measure, and obeys the parts above, this will not be noticeable.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And thus cure that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by a stone or by pressure or by congealed blood or by polyp or by fleshiness, and resembles those cases that we have described above in the division of methods for treating.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it is seen to be caused by a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then accordingly the patient should be bent over his own knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And accordingly compress the stones on that over his own back and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back to his knees, and the patient should strain his arm as much as possible towards him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the neck of the bladder is constricted to expulsion of the stone at the rear parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, the cause is vehement and made to affect the patient, then accordingly you should administer extraction from him with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and very thin, like a quill pen, with a subtlety of length about a palm and a half, and at its tip should be a fine thread.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting urine with that is to take a double thread and tie it in the extremity of the lanolin or fat for good binding; and insert the extremities of the thread into the posterior part of the syringe, and inscribe with razors if there is any superfluous cause of the fat, but introduce it into the syringe with vehemence. And accordingly fill the syringe with border and album of hen.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cause the patient to sit on a stool, and insert the syringe into his bladder and scrotum with olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And accordingly insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the scrotum; and accordingly double the scrotum above at the part of the navel; and accordingly push the syringe into that; and accordingly push that in until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient be pervaded by the cause, and not made to go according to this order, but rather the way in which it goes to tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And accordingly stretch the thread with the lanolin little by little, for the urine will absorb the lanolin.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And accordingly extract that and make it for urine cure, and use the syringe, do not cease to do so until the bladder is evacuated and the patient attains relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of catharticization of the bladder with celandine and similar instruments which are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or congealed blood is present in it, or the pungent juice is coagulated, and you want to make waters and medicines distill there, then accordingly use an instrument called celandine, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but in the extremity of it is deaf, that is to say, closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like that times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a hollowed-out place, in which is contained the water that is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that fills it, without addition, until when some cause is pulled out by it from the humidities, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled long, the water is pulled out, as if it were a celandine, which is filled with naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to extract humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of celandine into the humidity, and pull out with it the water that is poured in above, because the humidity is pulled out into the hollow of celandine.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And accordingly insert the extremity of celandine into the scrotum according to what we have recounted in the syringe; and accordingly pour in the humidity with water that pours in, because that humidity will reach the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip most up is similar to a small feather, and below it has a thread-like canal.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And accordingly take the bladder in motion, and put into it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and accordingly tie that between two with a strong ligature of double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And accordingly insert the extremity of the catheter into the scrotum.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And accordingly stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity, and slowly descend into it until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present to you, then accordingly take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate that all over its entire roundness; and accordingly insert a strong thread into those holes, so that they are revolved; and accordingly add the circle as it has been added before, so that you put in that which you want of humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And accordingly tie that in the instrument and make it as you have made it with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the lungs and stones generated in the bladder, and the signs of these.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that stone which catches operation with my hands and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is formed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you show it with a clear and brief explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	And I say that the stone generated in the bladder is most common among children; and one of its signs is that the urine that flows from the bladder is similar to water in subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels his scrotum, and many times pain, and accordingly is dressed; and with this, you will find the anus full of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to cure children of that until they have reached the age of 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is more common because it is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is greater and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at first to purify the patient with a catheter which extracts all the crack that is in his veins; for that crack sometimes hinders the formation of the stone and makes it difficult to detect.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And accordingly, the patient should be placed on his knees and supported by assistants for such a reason that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or else jump from one place to another at times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And accordingly, make the patient sit between your hands that are prepared, and the things of him should be left aside, for such reason that the bladder may be made to decline towards the posterior parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And accordingly, make sure that everything is done outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in space, then accordingly you should sit down quickly with section on him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch the stone completely, then accordingly it is necessary that you anoint with oil your right hand indicated by your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if he is a young adult, and insert that into his anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And accordingly, extract the stone until it comes out of your right hand.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And accordingly press upon it with your right hand and push that out to the posterior parts outside the location where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with her right hand; and command another assistant to extend her left hand upwards towards the posterior parts, and with her other hand to hold the cord which is below the genitourinary area, in the location where the incision is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And accordingly insert the spatula which is incident of this form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And accordingly insert the spatula which is incident of this form: and cut into it that which is between the anus and the genitourinary area, not in the middle location, but rather before the left side of the cleft; and make the incision on that stone and your right hand be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and straight as possible according to the amount that you have extracted from the stone, and not greater, for fear that the stone may be compressed by your right hand which is in the anus, and it will be forgotten without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the stone some parts are angled and rough, for which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that water there comes forth something resembling a small glass, and it is rounded, and it makes the extraction of it easier.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is one with angles and roughness, adjust it in the cleft.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not so, then accordingly you should press upon it, or stretch upon it with decent gestures, the extremity of which is like a file upon which you press upon the stone, and do not let it escape from there; or that you insert below it a subtle instrument with curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot press upon it, then accordingly you should widen the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut into it with great strength using vitriol mixed with vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, then accordingly at first you should push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and inscribe upon it; and accordingly push a little further away; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then accordingly ignorance is that you inscribe it with a great incision, for two things will happen to the patient: either he will die or he will be afflicted with continuous urination, and therefore the location will not be fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion from there until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture of it with razors until that stone is extracted in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And therefore, when you have completed your operation, then accordingly fill the wound with the juice of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rosated oil and water, for such reason that the abscess may be calmed.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And accordingly repose the patient on his back, and do not release the bandage for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have released that, dress the wound with water and much oil, and accordingly cure it with diaphrenic ointment and diabasilic ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is hot, swollen, and corrosive, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and by this means the urine is prevented (and this is known through the egression of blood with urine), then accordingly insert your right hand into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke the bladder to corruption and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, with what is suitable for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And accordingly in all the hours of the cure, you should lie down and adjust the medicines that are paused over the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the midst of the scrotum, and it is fixed there, and urine flow is prohibited, then accordingly cure that with what you have recommended before you proceed to section, for many times this cure is accused of being a section; and now I have already tried that, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron alfelut, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And accordingly take a thread, and tie it around the scrotum below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And accordingly insert the iron into the scrotum, piercing with ease until the perforator comes out to that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And accordingly turn the perforator with your hand in that stone little by little, and you pierce the perforation of it until you make it pass to the other side penetrate; for soon after the urine is released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And accordingly press your hand on the part of the stone that remains outside the scrotum, because it is stuck, and it is forgotten with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not prepared for you by any cause that prohibits it, then accordingly tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And accordingly inscribe upon the stone in that scrotum between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And accordingly extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And accordingly release the ligature and purify the congealed blood which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the stone, except that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is released near the extraction of the stone, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you when you have tied the thread above, that you lift the cord to the upper parts, or else return with your right hand and close the wound just as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the Extraction of Stone in Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if one does see stone in some of them, then accordingly the cure is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of those reasons is that the woman herself is very stubborn.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to behave herself well when she meets with a doctor, or is one of those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth reason is that the location of the section on stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need a prolonged section, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity demands it of you to this, then accordingly it is necessary that you take a woman who is well-behaved and not easily frightened.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then accordingly look for a woman who is quick and subtle, or present a mature woman well-experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has made progress in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore present that, and command it to do all that you will tell it, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that it should see if the woman is a virgin, then accordingly place your right hand in her anus and seek out the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find it, cut it below your right hand, and then command it to inscribe upon that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then accordingly command the matron to insert her right hand into the private parts of the patient and inquire about the stone, since she will place her left hand on the bladder and compress it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find it, then accordingly gradually massage that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the summit of her virtue until it reaches the root of the scrotum.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And accordingly inscribe upon that apposition of the might of the private parts to the root of the scrotum of some part that is located and centered on the stone, and the right hand not be removed from the stone, cut below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at first; and accordingly insert the forceps onto that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity which you know will cause the stone to be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are many: for some are small and large, and smooth and rough, and long and rounded, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many types there are of it by this which you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust to the place vitriol mixed with vinegar and stay there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure that you prepare with your own the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the wound that is inscribed, then accordingly you will pause powder on the location and strengthen it with powders and strictures descending, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for fear that the patient will soon die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And accordingly cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And therefore when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after some days, and the location is settled, then accordingly you return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of Section on Hernia in the Groin.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia in the groin is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac which is below the cord of the testicles containing the liquor, and it is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some times it is in the proper fold of fat which nature has prepared in the part of the liquor, until it becomes another liquor; and it is the cord of the testicles between the white sac which we have said, and not this but rather a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the testicles, because it flows into these testicles this material, and sometimes it occurs through blows made on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors, for the color of it is either declining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or blackish, or white watery, and it is that which is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is are these: for if it is in the white sac which we have said, then the abscess is rounded declining a little to length like the figure of a liquor, and appears the testicle, because the moisture contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper fold of fat, then the abscess is rounded with the part of the liquor and thus one estimates that it is another liquor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the testicles and the white sac, then a swelling appears below the sensation.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then accordingly you will inspect the color of the moisture in the abscess by entering through a channel from which the shape is preceded; and according to what it appears in the vestige of the entrance, judge from that what it is.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the cure of it with iron, then accordingly you must command the patient to be flaccid if that is possible for you, and sometimes fill his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And accordingly it should be raised up on the patient's back for some reason a little higher, and pause below him many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And accordingly sit you on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of him, which will extend his hand to one of two sides to the cord of the testicles and the part of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And accordingly take a spatula and divide the cord of the testicles from the middle location by length, so that it is close to the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And accordingly make the section according to straight line evenly distant from the line that should be drawn on the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white sac containing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And accordingly excise that, observe, and be careful not to inscribe it; and your excision with which you excise that part below, as if it were suspended in the liquor more subtly explores the excision according to the quantity that is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And accordingly pierce the white sac full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And accordingly separate between the two lips of the section with a hook, and extend the sac to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the testicles that contains it, and inscribe the sac in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And accordingly inscribe that with its entire totality or in parts, and most particularly the subtle sides, for if you do not scrutinize the inscription of it extremely well, there is no sure guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the liquor proceeds from that outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the sac, return inside it, and accordingly adjust the two lips of the cord of the testicles with a suture, and accordingly cure that just like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the liquor corrupted by another disease, then accordingly you should open the vessels which are sore the suspensors, and extract the liquor, and accordingly cure that with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore inscribe that part according to what you have done with the other equally; and if it appears to be one operation, then you will do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And accordingly you will wash the blood away, and enter into the sections lamb submerged in oil or rosy oil; and pause outside another lamb which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over two testicles and the navel of the belly; and pause above folded cloths and powders, and tie those above with a ligament according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and accordingly two cloths are pressed and filled with Carmelite wool according to this likeness; and the extremities are made with those that are wrapped in a cloth or wet wool, and are added to the structure in the breeches of the trousers, and one of the extremities takes from the backside into the crotch, and the second takes to the part of the navel, and two other extremities above two wounds below, and two other extremities above two abscesses; and all the structure is adjusted in the breeches of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cauter in place of section with iron; and it's that you take a cauterous cutlery subtle and inscribe it on the cord of the testicles, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white sac containing the water is uncovered, and then you take the cauter according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it's assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And accordingly pierce through that sac, and is ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And accordingly extend the sac with hooks, and excise with hooks, and excise with a burning cauterous cutlery; and inscribe that according to what is possible for you until it is eradicated entirely; and be careful not to let the liquor touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and less prolonged with bleeding, and better than the operation of section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter opposition, such as abscess during the time of section or cauterization, or bleeding, then accordingly you should take care to cure whatever opposition arises for you by that means, with the treatment which is suitable for him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is timid and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then accordingly administer perforation according to what we have recommended above; and it is when you are certain, by virtue of what we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	And accordingly you should make the patient sit on some elevated elevation, and pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And accordingly be the aperture wide enough that it drains all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And accordingly pause above the location of the cut and tie that off, in order that the remaining water flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And accordingly cure that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if opposition is to the flow of water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for that reason, because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound causes opposition and prevents the ejection of the water; then accordingly you should put a penalty or instrument into the wound with which the water is extracted from the dropsies, the form of which is preceded; or adjust a small piece in the opposite part of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is again accumulated in about two months or a year after; and when it is accumulated, then accordingly be pierced according to that same manner, for the patient will thus pass his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Section on Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of losing one's life through perilous dispositions; for which reason it has been seen by me, to dismiss him and be saved through better means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded of the operation on that and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore I say that abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose testicles are composed and it is made so for many reasons: or by sudden acute superfluity, which is poured into the testicles, or by blows.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not found in him pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very often it is a pustular abscess, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in him.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is made by the obstruction of arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels as well as that which is remembered of him, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is due to inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with those said ties; and it is not necessary for it to touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is due to inflammation of veins is not dispersed from him for any reason, even with compression by those said ties.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section be made and on the other flesh; and it's that you inscribe the cord of the testicles, and accordingly extend the liquor to the upper parts, and extract that from the white sac, and deliver the suspensors of the vessels, and tie them up, and inscribe the suspensor more than you deliver that from all part of the liquors.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the liquor is already consolidated in those fleshed parts, then accordingly you should extract the liquor and inscribe that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the sac or between what is between the vessels, then accordingly you should deliver all that adhesion and inscribe it with a rounded incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then accordingly you should inscribe all that is from him, and extract the liquor just as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then accordingly fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and accordingly cure that with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the Cure of Hernia that is of Veins.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Veins is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud in the softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult for the patient to exercise movement and walking.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease it is due to fear because of which the preceding memory is recalled.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I must say that the operation on that should be done according to what was done by the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should make the patient sit on an elevated elevation; and accordingly grasp the suspensors of the testicles at the left side; and accordingly tie the cord of the testicles with those said ties around the vessels which are proved to be in the sac; and have another assistant besides you, and extend them with a vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And accordingly inscribe with a spatula flat for a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And accordingly excise from all parts just as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And accordingly put an awl in those with a double thread, and tie that in the first of the places where the veins occur, and tie it again on another occasion at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And accordingly inscribe those in the middle location by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated with foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And accordingly cure the wound with treatment of other wounds in which you wish to bring forth healing because those vessels will not nourish one of two testicles, for it is not bad for that reason.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the veins are injured in all vessels, then accordingly it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be cut off along with the vessels, so that it may be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and thus be destroyed, or cut off because it will not be well with those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Cure of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to a section that proceeds in the sac extended over the belly on the side of the navel of the belly, so that by bursting open the bags of that rupture they come out into some of the bags.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the sac or of excrescence from it, and occurs in these two species for many reasons: or by blows, or by salt, or by noise, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by likenesses.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess growing equal to the prepuce on account of which the sac fills the bag.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it occurs by section of the sac, for at first it causes sudden and vehement pain; and it is an abscess that appears different from the cord that has been torn apart, and this is due to the ejection of the bag, and the body of it in the parts outside the sac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the bag's skin, and this is called intestinal hernia cirrhal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with distension, and sometimes it runs in the bag's fissure, and there it is retained, and this is very great perniciousness for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and mostly when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the accident in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation on that is that you command the patient to draw out the bag with his own hand towards the parts outside of his conquest if he obeys his returnment, and accordingly be seated over his back between your arms, and lift up the legs of him.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And accordingly tie the cord which ties the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and inscribe the cord of the testicles all along; and accordingly place it in two lips of the section hooks according as you need to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is done according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget from that, the liquor may be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And accordingly excise those sac-like things which are left over the cord of the testicles, until the white hard sac is uncovered in each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And accordingly insert the tie you said in that which secures the testicle, in that which is between the white sac and the sac, the latter being left over the cord of the liquor, and between the sac, and absolve with that adherence which is in the part behind the liquor.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And accordingly take hold of the cord of the testicles with your left hand, and extend the white sac in that direction with your right hand, and raise the liquor to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the liquor upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search for those said ties which may not be any cause of the bag being wrapped in the white hard sac.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause from him, then accordingly you should tie that to the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And accordingly take an awl with a thick thread of nine threads, and insert that from the last part of the sac, which is below the cord of the testicles, the one which you are about to section; and accordingly inscribe the extremities which protrude from the thread until there are four threads, and accordingly compose some of them into a figure in the manner of a cross; and tie with that the sac which we have said is left over the cord of the testicles with strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And accordingly envelop the extremities of the threads and tie them with strong binding until some of the vessels which nourish those are not able to transmit any cause because of this, lest a severe abscess occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another binding for a certain time after the first binding, about three times; and accordingly, these two bindings leave the sac which is left over the cord of the testicles in the amount of the great size of that, and inscribe all the remaining part according to roundness, and stop from it the liquor.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And accordingly inscribe in the part left over from the cord of the testicles by section, which will bleed and heal just as we have recommended in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And accordingly administer wool soaked in oil, and pause on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and sometimes the white sac is cauterized, which we have said should be done for fear of bleeding, because many times it occurs) and leave the binding until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the bleeding is delayed, then accordingly cold water should be applied, and pause on it until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly cure the wound with another treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not seen that anyone has been bold enough to attempt the cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done just as we have recommended in the hernia which is with wine; the one which you tie the vessels accordingly to the section on that with facility of iron; and accordingly cut off in the middle location around the abscess with this which causes that, until the vessels come forth.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the Disproportion that is made in the Navels.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the navels just as we have said, and protrude the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is not any cause for the testicles in the testicles; and if there is, it is little; and returns back to all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there is an adjustment of a fissure in the sac until it descends into the sac; and it occurs because of the extension of the sac which is in the navels just as we have said, which cause is that the sac is stretched, and accordingly becomes softened and the location abscesses and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of this is with a cauterization just as we have previously described it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your arms, and accordingly cuts off the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding through section by the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And accordingly strengthen the white sac that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And accordingly take a reed and pause it on the protruding location of the sac, and press it against the belly's front.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And accordingly bring together the two protruding locations on the extremity of the reed of the sac, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And accordingly extract the extremity of the reed, and do not inscribe the sac entirely, nor extend the liquor, nor any other cause just as you wish to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And accordingly cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you inscribe the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the sac has contracted and the prominence of rupture has not been adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, because it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh which is between it is softened, and it is fitting for that to be observed.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for him who is engaged in the cure of this to make the patient lie on his back between your arms, and inscribe all the softened cord which has been softened over the natural cord; and accordingly bring together two lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, remove in the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And accordingly inscribe between the sutures; and accordingly cure through the treatment of other wounds until it is healed and the threads come forth.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it is allowed to me to remember of it in this book; and there is no need for the remembrance of it except for two manners, one of which is because of what I know about the science of the physician when he is required to cure of that which occurs; and the other manner is that we many times have needed castration of other beasts for our uses through those, just as with mares, oxen, and pigs, and similar to cattle.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two manners: either by castration, or by incision at section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by castration, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie down in cold water until its testicles are softened and relaxed and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And accordingly take those with your hand into which they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind by the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And accordingly tie the suspenders, and inscribe on each liquor with one section until two liquors process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And accordingly inscribe those more than you will have excised.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those any cause from the sac, but only the subtle sac which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better which is done by castration, because castration leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the Cure of Hermaphrodites.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodites in men are according to two manners: one is when there appears in that which is the space in the cord of testicles, between two testicles a figure as if a female were in it, with breasts.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that there comes urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is one species: and it is that the female's vulva on the pubis is as if two male testicles, with only a small part of the outer skin resembling the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one species of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you need to inscribe those adjusted flesh into which the pressure of that one is escaped, and accordingly cure those with the treatment of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine comes that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On Lumps and Flesh that protrudes due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lump is very little adjusted over natural causes until it is estranged and made to be a legible sign; and sometimes it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it spreads just like in men, and extends as far as to the act of copulation.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore it is necessary that you take the excess lumpiness with your hand or with a tool and inscribe.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop until you have inscribed, especially in the belly of the rational part, so that it may not engender a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly cure that with the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the womb until it fills it, and very little is emitted to the outer parts according to the shape of a tail (and therefore we will also call this one "malautia caudata"); therefore it is necessary that we inscribe as we inscribe lumpiness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Cure of Rickets.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Rickets is when the female's vulva is not perforated, or if it is pierced with a small hole.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease which has preceded, and that is caused either by flesh not properly adjusted or by subtle or thick sac.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or in the ribs of the child, or in the topmost part of the child, or in the lowest part of the child, and prohibits coition, pregnancy, and childbirth, and very little prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by observing the pulse of the metrona, if the obstruction is apparent, palpable; but if it is not apparent, then you must search for it with the fingers or with a reed.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if obstruction is due to subtle sac, and is palpable in the two lips, then you must cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause on the two lips of the pulse, and accordingly pause the fingers on both sides simultaneously.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, with her legs extended, and accordingly stretch out the two lips with force until that subtle sac is broken and the obstruction is open.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And accordingly take wool and wet it with oil and pause that on the location, and make the patient lie down at home for a day in order that the inscribed location may not be consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the sac is large and thick, it is necessary that you inscribe that with lard or with myrtle leaves.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to fleshiness, then suspend it with a tool and inscribe that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you will have medicines that cause the blood to cease flowing without scratching, such as hiccups, dragon's blood, and gallbladder, adjusted with album of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And accordingly administer a leaden catheter wide enough to prevent the wound from being consolidated slightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural birth of other flesh, and accordingly it is necessary to inscribe according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to gangrenous abscess, then let there be no contradiction with iron in any manner against the gangrenous abscess that is in the mother.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the Cure of Hemorrhoids, Tail, and Red Bottom that occurs in the vulva of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a swelling of the outlets of many veins, until those veins flow continuously with blood; and as old hemorrhoids become, they form excrescences.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now I have said in the division the species of those and their signs, and will say also which ones receive cure and which ones do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and excrescences when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then in those there should not be made cure with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the outlet of the mother and on which one can sense something, are those which are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and accordingly stretch out her excrescence with forceps or with rough cloth, and inscribe those on the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And accordingly powder is to be spread over those with the flows of blood from one of the inscribed powders without scratching, such as ash tree and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And accordingly press her feet with your own for an hour, and accordingly pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flows persistently, then let that be stopped in a decoction of sumac and scorched mulberries and gauls and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And accordingly take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make an poultice with water on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is absolved, it is good; and otherwise, let it adhere to two poultices, and on the nipples without scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly take wool and submerge it in the juice of colicandra or in the juice of Arnagluz or in the juice of Gurravera with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and accordingly cure the location with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But the excrescence that is of hard regard, it is necessary that you inscribe on that which appears to you according to what I have said in the equal part.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the Perforation of Accidental Hernia in the Mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of accidental hernias occur in the mother, such as gangrenous and lapidary abscesses, ulcers, adhesions, herpes, hemorrhoids, and red bottoms, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And now I have said these illnesses and the species of those and their signs, and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that you say in this treatise on gangrenous abscesses which occur in the mother when they are among those that can be cured, and if you wish to know how the operation is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the gangrenous abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and if it becomes more inflamed and if there is a sensation on it, then do not cut with perforation, and cure that with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And accordingly it is necessary that you make the woman lie on a bed with two pillows; and recline her on her back and adjust her feet to the part most distant from the belly, and her legs be expanded, and pause her arms below her knuckles, and tie each one with a ligation suitable for water.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And accordingly the midwife will follow the right hand and administer the instrument with which the outlet of the mother is opened, in the form that will come about in those causes that are to be done accordingly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And accordingly when you wish to administer this instrument, you must make it with a reed the womb of the mother of the woman, and that which is entered into the mother's womb should not be more than the mother's womb and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is greater than the womb of the mother, then it is necessary that you powder with powder on the texture of the womb of the mother so that it may be prohibited for any instrument to enter into the womb of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And accordingly it is necessary that you pause the turning that runs in the instrument from the right hand and above, and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the handle until the outlet of the mother's womb is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you stopper that with the head of it with lard.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you pause in the wound a poultice submerged in rose oil or green oil which has some purgative properties; and pause the pressure in the section within the womb of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pause outside the mother, and on the pentinent wool clean, submerged in water in which blueberries have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly it is cured within two days with an ointment that corresponds to the condition until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the mother is washed and the wound is cleansed in this way that it is anointed with water and honey, and accordingly with water in which rye or long aristology has been boiled, and accordingly returns to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the mother's flesh, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from curing it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives in what manner the living beings should be medicated when they are sick according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife should know in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it, and this is because when you see the woman expelling at the partings and desires to smell the air, and on top of that she is lifted by what is above her part, and hastens the exit of the living being, then you will understand that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the exit of the child over its head, and the second birth with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, since you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the child be compressed in order that the living being may descend slightly when they are on its head, and then give birth to the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another this part is non-natural and not to be tolerated, because when the living being is born on its feet and the body of it is born before its head and its feet, and one hand or at the foot .i., or is born the head of it and one hand or at the belly of it, and very little is turned over its neck, and similar to the figures that are non-tolerable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to beware of error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you will show the entire figure of those, and which art is in them so that it may be signified by that and has been established on top.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is born on its head by natural expulsion, and that is violent against the woman and is made a difficult part, and times the virtue of it already debilitated, then let that be stopped, or what women have in them, and evaporate the vulva with fenugreek cooked and with sweet olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And accordingly let the metrona enter between the two said spatula and slit with that which is the second birth, or cut it with its own nail until it runs through what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it descends the afterbirth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a poultice of papyrus and a poultice of fenugreek with camomile.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And accordingly command it to be compressed and make that afterbirth snore with condensation; and tie the mouth of it and the nose of it for one hour, because the afterbirth will soon be forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two more of the afterbirth are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce those with small ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then let the woman be paused on a bed and lift her feet up, and accordingly conceive the bed on the earth; and the woman is to be held so that she may not fall with the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the afterbirth is not returned and the child dies, then let those be inscribed and extract the remains of the child or tie its body to the hand with cloth and extract that with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the Exit of the Embryo over its Feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is born over its feet, then it is necessary that you push those in, and accordingly transform the small child, and accordingly make it equal, and accordingly take one foot of it and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are born into the legs, then it is necessary that you command them to exit, and make that afterbirth snore with condensation, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with what we have recounted, then you must return the small child little by little until it pauses in the second figure of nature, because that will soon be forgotten with a lighter exit.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take a poultice of altor and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and accordingly line it with water on the vulva of the woman, at the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And accordingly make that poultice cease in warm water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts that are left of it are relaxed, then make it sub-fumigate with myrtle and sub-pause it for.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation has taken place for one hour, then make it cease on a bed, and accordingly make that afterbirth snore and stretch out its mouth, and take away from that, and press the lowest part of her belly with gentle compression, because the child will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Exit of the Child over its Fingers and Toes.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child is born in this form, then you must entwine its toes little by little; and accordingly the woman should be elevated on her neck, and her feet hanging down, and those should be placed on the lyre, and complete its toes.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And accordingly press on her belly little by little, and accordingly extract what is left of her feet from the ears until it is prepared at the lowest part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not forgotten, then take her feet and move them with violent motion, and accordingly press that which is on the hypochondria little by little until the child can push against the parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And accordingly entwine its toes and equalize the child little by little, and command the woman to exit until the child is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Exit of the Child laterally hanging from one of its toes.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be entwined in the reduction of the hand of it, but if you cannot reduce that, then lift the woman and make her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the lyre, and pound her legs with strong concussion, and accordingly administer those which I have recounted as poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbearing is done, then make her cease on a bed, and accordingly study on the reduction of the hand, and equalize the child according to natural figure, and make the woman snore and command it to compress itself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Exit of the Child over its neck, with its toes expanded and the fold of it at the two sides of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife take the hand of the child and accordingly revolve it little by little, and make it easy.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and as much as is equalized, then pause on the vulva of her that which we have recounted of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And accordingly command it to be compressed little by little, and when you have done that, then make her cease on a bed and command it to be inclined over the right side, and accordingly command it to be compressed; and make it snore with condensation.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the prepared fetus onto its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it is delivered to the horror of the mother in this manner, consider, and accordingly you inscribe the afterbirth with your nail until it is evacuated of its humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you must inscribe that from the navel, for so that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And accordingly push the child into the afterbirth until it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and if God so wills, it will soon be forgotten with a lighter exit.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that sometimes twins are born, and some times three or four, but this is strange and does not befit nature; but five causes are natural, and none live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And in those cases, whether they are multiplied or not, one afterbirth, and they are separated by a ciphac, distinguish each from the others within the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are forgotten thus as if it were one child born naturally with a lighter exit, and sometimes they are born with an unnatural exit just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to deliver and persevere until they reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then you must cure those just as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and in delay, and is ingenious according to all figure, according to what is prepared by nature leading to salvation.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and those that are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Certain ages are formed in the mother's womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and up to ten, and you should verify with me that a woman aborts at the sixth or tenth stage, while another may have all of them formed, which is caused by measurement according to the wise and glorious.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this must be in the science of the midwife because very little is like that to her, and therefore pause at that with such as is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of the Fetus when it is Dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not born outside, and you are forced to use an operation on her, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has a sound virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents for which upon her there is feared destruction.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be elevated on the lyre over her backside, and have her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that with two parts or be tied to the lyre in such a way that the body of it does not extend excessively during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And accordingly, you should moisten the mouth of her with oil and sweet olive oil and poultice of altor and fenugreek and seed of lily.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And accordingly, the midwife should take her hand with those oils and poultices, and accordingly entwine her hand with ease in the mother, and accordingly search for the precise location where the nails are stuck to the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And find the suitable location there: then you should consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and accordingly fix the nails in the hollows of it, or on the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or below the beard, or in the furcula of it, or in the appropriate places on the chest, or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is onto the feet of it, then in the pubis, or in the middle of the chest.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the nail with the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and entwine the hand with ease and fix the nail in some of those locations which we have said, until one reaches the cause of the boyd.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And accordingly, pause and fix in the apposition of it another nail or the third if necessary, for so that there may be an equal attraction, and not an extension according to its straightness only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is good for all parts, for so that the exit of it may be alleviated just as it is done in the way of the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that which is between them for the extension to be mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife take certain fingers with oil and entwine those expertly and revolve with what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the nails should be permitted to enter that location where it is more uppermost; and do so until all the fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is gone before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around that; and accordingly extract that until all is forgotten, and inscribe that either in the juncture of the hand or in the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is necessary to do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is contriction in the exit, or if there is water adjusted in the head of it, then it is necessary that the midwife entwine between the fingers the spatula with spines and split the head and extract the water, or that she dissects that with a instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come from the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do so if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary that you inscribe that with an algemate, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and accordingly extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is extracted and constricted at the furcula, then it should be split open until the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obeys the exit, then you should inscribe the head at once according to what is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the remaining part of the belly is apostemated or is in a liquid state, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the humidity which is in it runs out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of it is light and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then it is necessary that you extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and that you split open the belly and feet until the water which is in them runs out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are still and return to the head, then take it with your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then insert your hand into the preeon of layre, and seek out that head, and draw it with those fingers into the mouth of the mother, and accordingly entwine in it one nail, or two nails, and pull it with them.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an apostemal swelling that occurs in it, then it is necessary not to trouble about it; instead, it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid and greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And minister plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its own chest, then it is necessary to pierce it as much as possible; and administer water that we have said for the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it is necessary to inscribe in membranes, and extract.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause behind the afterbirth.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer water that we have said for the cure of apostemal swellings which occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there occurs a flow of blood, then you should descend into stiptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and accordingly above that same focus another pregnancy begun, and accordingly dead heat is the other fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	An accident befell me at a long time ago, an apostemal swelling in my own navel; and it swelled up to the point of being like a hot fever, and I began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were summoned to his cure, and treated him for a long time, and the wound did not consolidate.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to him some plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and after passing certain days, I extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there should not be bones.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I dressed the wound, and extracted from him several bones, the woman existing in her own milk-disposing vessels, and already living in such a way for a long time, corrected by him a small amount of pus.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not consider it strange, but rather because in that is science and assistance to that which the physician artist administers with his hand for cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a veritable uterus, in which is opened the mother:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strength in which are equalized the liberties, to which equalization are two virtues at two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But however this virtue must be more subtle in the strictor, and made of ebony or of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the latitude of each foot is two fingers and the edge of both feet is one finger; and the longitude of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle location between the two woods are two adjustments of those very woods which are already fixed, the length of which is almost equal to one palm and a little more, and the latitude of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are entwined in the mouth of the mother so that it is opened to them when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But however in the extremity of it there are two adjustments like times, and the length of those adjustments is one palm, and the latitude of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you must cause the woman to cease sitting on the lyre, and let her feet hang down, so that what is between her thighs may be opened.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And accordingly work with your hand on the instrument just as you would with forceps equalization according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until she makes it in the way that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of uterus which they called the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impulsion, in which the fetus is propelled.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of amenorrhea, in which the large head is contained.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps which have teeth at the end, like times, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, which has teeth like teeth of a reaping hook with which it is inscribed and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of amenorrhea little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of nail having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of nail having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which are teeth like saws with which the head of the fetus is contained.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities at which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of them are multiplied and prepared, the artisans must be as skilled in their operation and as expert as they can be, for it is easier to perform their operation.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you must not neglect those instruments in any way, for the necessity of them is irrepressible.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the afterbirth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary that you order the patient to strain her own belly, and accordingly make her fart with conditions, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of her and on her nostrils, and if through this it has come out, all is well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate it in the covering of a wound and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the mother, like calamus, rough thistle, anise, camomile, Arabic balm, cassia lignea, and St. John's Wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and then pause it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And accordingly, place a reed cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And accordingly, make her fart as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if the cure does not take effect and the afterbirth remains, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in an emulsion of aloes, and accordingly entwine it with a cord and seek out the afterbirth, and when you find it, then take it and stretch it little by little. But if it is attached in the womb of the mother, then entwine your hand as we have recounted, and when you find the afterbirth, extract it slowly and carefully so that the mother does not suffocate from the vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Above all, it is necessary to be skilled on both right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And accordingly, adjust in the quantity of attraction, for she will obey and evade adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with farting and medication of the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then be careful that you do not tire over it in iteration of abstraction, but rather let what has come out from it to the mouth of the mother lie in the vagina of the woman, and accordingly encrust it with a poultice and tetra-pharmacopoeia; for that will make it rot away slowly and dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, it is elevated to bad authority in the head and stomach, and accordingly leads the patient into suffering; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered according to this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already been experimented with sub-fumigation of hazelnuts and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated in order to retain menstruation and afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of yew or horn.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it is paused with the subtle extremity in the womb and the wide extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation is paused over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that in until that sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate with another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the cure of the unbroken navel of the child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with navels that are not perforated, which already have a subtle and opaque cicatrice.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife pierce with her own finger that cicatrice; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the lactation.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And accordingly, place on that a layer of lanolin infused in wine and oil; and accordingly cure it with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may be opilated, then place a reed cane in the wound for several days, and stop when the child will desire to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there occurs an opilation of the navel due to consolidation of wound or apostemal swelling; then it is necessary that this consolidation be inscribed, and accordingly cured with the water we have said for the cure and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the cure of fistulas that were left over.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas which remain after the departure, being lower down in the navel and thicker than those which are located near the anus outside or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a single fistula or several.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And since this nodule is aged and flows with white or subtle pus, and sometimes some of these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrating are known by what comes out of them through the egress and windiness; and sometimes the patient uses the egress, and very little comes out from those vermin.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space between the bladder and the urethra, and into the glans of the penis; and some also penetrate into the junction of the vagina and into the notch of the clitoris.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to know if a fistula is penetrating into the anus or not-penetrating, is that you insert your finger into the anus and entwine a subtle thread of horn or iron in the fistula when there is no turbulence.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turbulence in that, then you insert into it a subtle thread of lead or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel that at all or there is no process of the tract at all nor any cause of egestion, vermin, or windiness, as we have said, then you know it is not-penetrating, and accordingly turn to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the glans of the penis, then the significance of it is to be cleansed with urine from that place and prohibition of further passage so that the location may be consolidated through medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vagina or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread will pass through here if there is no turbulence in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from here there is pus everywhere; and that it does not hold with medicine, nor is it consolidated by poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of these is the toil and vanity of foolish physicians who are fixed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not aged, the healing with iron is expected according to what you have recounted, and what has been tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your thighs over his own back and raises his knees to yours, so that the woman's legs are inclined towards her belly, and accordingly you insert a thread of lead or horn into the fistula if there is turbulence, until you know the place where the thread passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that patient feels pain around the navel, then you must insert your finger into the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the thread already inserted and having passed through, or between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and accordingly do not intervene in that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some may say that it is healed in some men's hearts.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which healing is expected in that place is that you ignite a subtle cauter, according to the size of the fistula, just as it has been preceded, and insert that ignited into the fistula until it comes around the navel; and accordingly iterate that two or three times until you know that all those fleshed-adjusted fistulas that are like reeds of swan's plumage have become adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And accordingly, cure that with cloth wraps in butter until all those adjusted fleshed-adjusted fistulas are healed; and accordingly, cure that with medicines promoting and consolidating the skin, and if it is healed, well; and otherwise, there will be no healing at any time through another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the thread goes in and does not penetrate into the navel which is in the anus, but instead enters between that and the thread which is a velamen of flesh or cicatrix, and the fistula opens up to the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the thread, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the end of the thread emerges, and through the thread it is liberated and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And accordingly, cleanse those fleshed-adjusted fistulas which are assembled like a reed of swan's plumage and do not remain any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if there is a flow of pus which comes between you and your operation when you are cleansing those fleshed-adjusted fistulas, then the most excellent instrument to use is cauterization with fire or acute medicine, because cauterization with fire adjusts good two habits: so it adjusts those adjusted fleshed-adjusted fistulas, and abscesses the pus by excising excess humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And accordingly, cure that with cloth wraps in butter or in threefold fabric until the place gets firm, and accordingly, cure the wound with poultices of hard flesh which generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines, in which there is purification and excision; when accordingly it is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum of the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if the thread is inserted and between you and it is a velamen of cicatrix or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, then there is no operation in that place except through the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the conquest of the place so that you can insert the threads and the propounded cure, and do not process anything else except drying because you do not want to inscribe the lacerta contained in the navel, and what happens is that it occurs on the patient's own accord through their desire; or to elongate the velamen and remove the pus that dries out that place until it reaches the prop of the anus, as we have said, either with a thread or with another instrument of acute extremity, and accordingly cleanse those fleshed-adjusted fistulas which are in the drying process, and accordingly strive to make the restoration of the entire wound through drying, and if the orifice above is not consolidated and the fistula remains open on one side of the anus, it will be even more difficult for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and on the margin of the anus, then take the thread of perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the vessels according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that faithful wrap of V-folds or around those, and accordingly insert the thread into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of that place.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the margin of the anus, then you extract the thread from that tract as if you were inserting your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust the two ends to be equal, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when you insert the thread more deeply into the flesh, strengthen it well until those fleshed-adjusted parts are inserted between the two ends of the thread and they fall apart.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And accordingly, cure the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way that you have prepared, except not to make it too narrow, for it is not up to you to do so; and accordingly, make it so that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatula with which the fistula is split open: its curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not insert anything that is unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which there is bleeding in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two ways, for either they are between the anus like carbon, or those that are like grass on rye.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them at all times and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which yellow water or a small amount of blood flows with continuous flow, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is outside the anus is that you command the patient to sit down and to stretch out until the anus is relaxed and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take hold and suspend with the hooks or whatever you have those at your finger's end, and accordingly insert those into the patient's rectum.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hooks are not grasped in those due to the moisture of their surface and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of cotton or wool, and extract them with your fingers, and accordingly insert them and powder some powders over them around the incision, so that they are adapted to those places where cauterization is needed; or cauterize those according to what has been preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And accordingly, cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then cause the patient to sit on a cristeri with a little bit of mordicacio, and be washed with that water which is in the navel and which will obey evacuation slightly when the patient presses.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of theirs is slight, and it is that you take those with your finger or with hooks and insert them, and accordingly cure those with the water we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who will make the incision must administer suturing to them in this manner: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into a needle and accordingly extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the most distant part from the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stricture, and accordingly pull out the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one and don't close it, so that the superfluity of blood will flow from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And accordingly, pause on the anus with a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerote; and pause that on the navel and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly, leave that until it forms a scab; and when it has formed, cure those with poultices or other cures until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the Cure of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times accidents happen through excision of a fissure or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are so old and no longer good with that medicine, then you must take those away with the point of a spatula or your finger until they are made humid and there is no more scabbing above, which prevents them from consolidating; and accordingly, cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must take those away with the reason more violent than the first, until there is no more bleeding and they are exfoliated; and accordingly, cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the Cure of Hemorrhoids, that is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids, that is the key, and not just notes in red according to the color of the body like a cap of claviel, and it is done throughout the entire body and most especially in the lower parts and the right side, and thus it can be inferred by those pains that one should take heed.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to incise that which is in the circuit of the key, and to take hold with forceps or hooks, and to eradicate its root; and accordingly, cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a verruca is a small, hard, rounded, and fistula-like prominence on the surface of the body, and many times it appears in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for that is to stretch and incise it, or to strengthen it with a thread or with wool until it forms a scab.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize that too, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then they are eradicated, both inward and outward, with the instrument which you will dictate.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a formica is a small, fatty or fistula-like prominence on the surface of the body, going forward and when the finger touches that it seems to be bitten by a formicula, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for that is to take a needle made of swan's quill or vulture's quill, and be strong, and place it on the formica so that it contains the circle of the needle in its parts; and accordingly, revolve your hand with the needle until you incise what is in the circuit of the formica, and place it in the navel of the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle made of iron or steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Be the upper part of the needle thin, subtle (so it is not perforated), wrapped in order that over the said place there may be a gentle ablation and a rotation of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the formica according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the Form of the Instruments that are administered to give Cristeria.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes it is made Cristeria of silver or lead or iron melted or pounded; and sometimes it is made with those instruments small and great according to what they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children is small; and for those whose backsides are fat or troubled, their Cristerias are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Form of Cristeria Great and Small:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle of you above, in which the pouch is tied, should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the pouch is tied just like it happens sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of you below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (so it is not open) just like a lion's, and should bend back slightly; and on one side of you there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker than thin.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which the medicines of the vesica of animal or sheep's wool are placed, and the root of you should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with many holes just like it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes is as wide as the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And accordingly, insert the thread into those holes strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads or around them; and adjust that with the pouch; and when it is placed in you, the pouch should be tightened at the head of the cristeria between two distinguished points with a firm constriction, and accordingly cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And accordingly, the patient should be raised up on his back, and lift his legs upwards and place one foot above the other, with a cloth or a lanolin over it; and accordingly, apply some oil or albumen of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substance to the extremity of the cauterized area; and accordingly, insert that into the anus with ease, and accordingly, have the nurse take the pouch and express everything out of it with two fingers and samples with vehemence until everything is evacuated from the poultice; and accordingly, extract the poultice and the patient should lower his legs to the floor.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine makes him sleep that deeply, hold it as long as he can tolerate; and if he sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more effective in healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize that in the diseases of bowel evacuation and the appearance of blood, then you must repeat the cauterization until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then make the poultice very subtle and like a lion's, one of those poultices with which children are treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the Cure of Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues that which is suitable for the free man, and I will say thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to their complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to the way in which they are made and according to the place on which they fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times plagues are made are just like a blow of iron, or incision with a sword or with a knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those from many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the plagues that are on the parts of the body are just like a plague which falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I will recommend the cure for some plagues, by which you may pause and reason about the other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, because the remembrance of the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple plague occurs on the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow of iron or similar, and the wound has already opened so much and is large and you fear on that patient having an abscess caught, then take care and bleed the cephalic vein at once, and do not delay; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of the virtue of it, unless some other cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the blood which has come out of the plague is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And be the bleeding from the opposite side of the wounded part; and take care that the patient is not filled with blood, nor fed with wine or heavy food.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits from the beginning, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause on the wound, if an abscess is caught, apply hot oil or wine which is sterilized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is sure of an abscess, then pause on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend in due small proportion.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause on another poultice until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is great or is due to incision with a sword and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted by powders, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend on the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already uncovered of bone and skin, and there is no retention of it except for a small suspender, then incise that and accordingly cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh to its natural place, and command the patient to be fed with food in which there is grease: caps and forms like those, similar to their own, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the wound putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then you must incise all that is rotten and cut it out, and accordingly cure that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it is not closed by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find that one which is not incised, then you must incise it with a spatula or tie it off; and if necessary, take steps to ensure that what we have said does not come to pass, then you must cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; therefore, you must powderize on those this powder, since it will consolidate before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of dragon's blood one part, blood of dragon two parts, and caus no-extincta three parts; mix all well and finely powdered, and fill the wound with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres well to that, and coagulates with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly, strengthen that above with powders and loosen it, and do not remove it until it is in this state, for the medicine will not be absorbed from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes make this powder alone, when you do not have oil of dragon's blood and blood of dragon in front of you.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And already perform this kind of operation on great wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and be tightened, and on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer, then it is not suitable to apply this powder, but instead cure those with what we have said, by applying certain poultices or by applying powders of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they become purulent; and accordingly, cure those with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it occurs by a fracture in bone, and is small, then you must extract that with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the cure for fractures of the head in this way which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	On the Wounds of the Neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is involved, then if it is a nerve, do not apply any further treatment to it, but rather avoid applying anything that would cause vehement stiptication, such as ziniar and zegi which are like vitriol and similar to them, which can harm the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply anything to the wound that could cause total numbness, because the substance of the nerves is numb and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is the most noble part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that is treated with light medicines, just as it is cleansed with double water, and some of it infused in hot or not hot oil, and when it is cleansed with double water and the other parts are reduced according to this method, and poultices moistened.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is great, then apply suture, or tighten the lips of it, and accordingly cure that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or occurs at the lowest part of the poultice, then perforate that in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the wound has already been incised and an artery is cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it off, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of it have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you must adjust the lips of the wound with suture over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; above equalize that and reduce it to its natural shape, and accordingly strengthen it with decent tension, and loosen it for a few days; and accordingly cure that with poultices in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then pierce that and then, if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those which you can; and what is not dressed by you, leave it until the wound is purulent, and be separate from it and the excretion of it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powderize on that the powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has made a fistula, then cure that with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	On the Wounds of the Neck or Similar Ones When Made Between the Shoulders and is Made with a Sword or Knife or Lance or Similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow from a lance or knife and pierces the depth of the wound, then consider more whether the wound has ventilation when the patient breathes; know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with its own blood, then you must pause on it in the first hour with powder, and not strengthen that so that the blood does not become retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and kill the patient, but rather pause on it an attractive poultice, and remove it two times a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not at your present, then you must pause on the orifice of the wound with a small amount of vinegar so that it sucks out what comes from the humidities; and make sure the patient sleeps over the wound so that water flows in there and adjusts itself.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasmodic movement nor tremor of the heart, nor constriction of the artery, and other good dispositions are seen in him, then know that the wound is saved; and accordingly cure it with caustics and other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of him is excused, and it has already been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; cure therefore that according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to incision with a sword or knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure that with what precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and you have already incised those fragments, then twist the wound and pull out those fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then loosen them until the wound purifies, and the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds that occur in other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	On Wounds of the Abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either great, small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	On the Great Wounds Some Times You Will Find the Bladder or Nerve of the Bladder, So That There Is Intrusion Of Them And The Suture Of Them To Be More Vehement and Subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is seen that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to insert them into their place at once, for they swell and become engorged, making the instrument of it difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the bladder, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common that are used in sutures of other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific sutures communicate with the others, but however they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you any exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the bladder due to it, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then this is done in one of two ways: either by the parvity of the disruption just as we have said, or when the bladder has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this is the case, then it is necessary that you scrape off that part and immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water only, or that you soak it in warm water with cyperum, spic, and embrocate, and apply it to the bladder until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes this remedy is seen in which there is stiptitation, and it is better than hot water alone for the resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the inflammation be resolved, then you moisten the bladder with water in which there is a high and bitter extract, because by this it is alleviated the instrument of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument is excused for this cure, then divide the disruption into small parts with an instrument by which it is incised and bloodless.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is proper and not a section, and there is no occupation to cut into what is necessary and inevitable.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see how its form is:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and acute, and the other part not acute, and the extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather obtuse to some extent.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is amplified and extends outside the bladder, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of nature, in its own proper place, if possible above it, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back with his knees higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate the patient's head and feet above the remaining parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your intention and consideration at that point for some time, so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary that you administer this in great wounds and medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause on what is prepared for you, and accordingly make sure that the minister be between your most trusted advisors, who have the disruption entirely under their hand and adjust the lips of it, and accordingly uncover from that to this one who sees some other cause to propose suturing.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first take a needle, or count of needles according to the size of the wound; and accordingly leave from the end of the disruption on the little finger, and strengthen the needle one by one, so that you do not put faith in both ends of the thread at once, with two ends of the ciphac that is left over from the parts inside, until it makes that penetrate from this part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the ciphac, making four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And accordingly strengthen with double thread in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and accordingly add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and accordingly leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in that, and accordingly tie it with thread just as you tied the first needle; and do not cease to do so if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium size between grossness and subtlety, because the fine needles barely cut into the flesh; and the coarse ones are of difficult instrument in the thread, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size in subtlety and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted in both ends of the thread at once, because then the flesh would not be cut slightly and the wound would be healed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suturing for fear that the wound will be prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And accordingly insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's sleep; and pause on the suturing with poultices spread out from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this species of suture with needles in that manner is more suitable for small wounds, because it is sufficient to use one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four ends, of the thread and two ends of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped in subtlety and coarseness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And accordingly when you have the needle penetrate these four ends, reduce the needle to that middle part from which you began, in order that the thread may withdraw from the most superior part to the wound, so that the suture be according to a cloth suture with which the cloths are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the finger, smaller.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture knows men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I treated the wound which had occurred to a man in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm, and it was surrounded by bladders around two palms from the bladder of the middle part, and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that since the bladder had been pierced through the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and cured that man, and he is sane; and accordingly, I saw him for many years, and he was converted to his former dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be cured; and by a miracle it was so, because you did not treat him with poultice, since there was no remedy or medicine available in that place, but instead you paused over the wound cutting twice a day and ablution with water of honey until it was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you two species of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the thread, and insert needle from the outside part to the inside part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore, as the needle penetrates the thread and inserts itself into the lacertus according to rectitude and in length throughout the entire body, and leaves the end of the ciphac in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part in the other extremity of the arm.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made it penetrate once, then you make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the arm from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the end of the ciphac that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate with that your penetration which you make it penetrate in the ciphac at the extremity of the mirror which is on this side until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And accordingly, begin from this side and sew that with the extremity which is of the ciphac on the other side, and extract the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and accordingly reduce it in that thread and sew the extremity of the ciphac which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the thread which is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another, and do this once again, and so on until you have sewn all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with a suture of pellicies in which you sew the skins, and so that you sew the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the thread, and leave it there until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second species of proper suture which you call Gualia, and this is said to be according to the word of God and for God's recommendation, is that you sew it according to semilitut with which some physicians sew it, in such a way that they bring together all parts to their natural comparison; and apply the extremity of one part and the extremity of the mirror to another extremity, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own side from the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that same spot, and leave two ends of the ciphac; and accordingly, turn the needle back and make it penetrate from outside to inside in both ends of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And accordingly, turn those strings, and make them penetrate from the inside part to the outside part in two extremities of the mirror that are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture which was previously remembered.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some will say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the introduction of needle from what belongs to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who sew skins together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly, the suture of it is more difficult than for other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medical treatment for wounds is the judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you succeed in healing a recent wound before it has been altered by air, and reduce the swelling and sew it up and adapt it properly, then pause over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that some medicines which are at your presence until they make a hard crust and loosen the threads, and be consolidated ciphac and mirror; and accordingly cure it thus as is the cure of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you don't have the medicines at your presence, then pause over that for now, since it begins to putrefy, cutting off, and changing those two times a day, as I taught you, until it is healed, because you won't need other medicine in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound will communicate to lesions in the principal members, then it is necessary that you immerse a linen cloth in olive oil of good quality or in rose oil, and pause it on the circuit of the places that are between the armpits and leave them so.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own bladders, since many times this happens, then you should crustify it with vinegar stiptic black tea, and especially if the purulence is proceeded in the bladder and is made an exitura penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what is of the large bladder is a more lightened healing than what is in the small bladders.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the bladder which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wound that breaks in all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of its magnitude, and because of subtlety of the body of that one, and because of proximity of that to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if this that proceeds from the wound is the cloth, and you succeed in obtaining it recently, then reduce it according to your straightness with which you reduce the bladders equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already become green or black, then you should strengthen it with a thread over the place that is debilitated of it, so that the flow of blood may come forth, for in the cloth are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And accordingly, inscribe this which is another kind of bond, and pause two extremities of the thread pending from the left side of the wound outside, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it to the cohesion of the cloth and emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the bladder.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the bladder and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, for this reason I saw one who was wounded in his own belly with a lancet and had an old wound and made fistula, and there was great swelling and ventosity.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I prolonged the treatment of him although he was not convinced in his healing, but I subtily continued that until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw the place already consolidated, then I told the patient that he had escaped from the bad outcome of his accident in his own belly; and he did not endanger anyone by this bad accident and remained in his usual habits eating and drinking, and accordingly went into a bath and was exercised on his feet.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones will say that when you find a wound in the bladder and it is small, then you should bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take clamps of great size; and accordingly adjust the two lips of the wound and pause one clamp of those which have an open mouth over the two lips of the wound; therefore when you take them up and strengthen your mouth, abstract the head of it, because they adhere and are not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And accordingly pause another clamp near the first one, and do not cease to do this with clamps one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And accordingly reduce it and sew up the wound; and leave those clamps attached in the bladder until the bladder is healed; and no harm shall befall any patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the bladder may be tied with a fine thread made from the bladder of an animal attached to it, since it is more in needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads from the bladder, and it is quite denuded, and accordingly tie the extremity of it with a thread, wrapped around, and accordingly introduce that thread into needles and sew it with that to the bladder, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with clamps is not other than according to the way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the bladder's subtleties, for then it is not just a matter of suturing, but subtlety, and not healing of it all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the cure of boils and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that all wound and apostema when they become gangrenous and old, and are made an ulcer, and are not consolidated and always putrefy and do not abate, then, wherever it may be in any member, universally is called fistula and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a node made of fat, hard, white, in which there is no pain and into which is absorbed like the suffering of an owl; and for this reason it is called azukem, that is, punishment.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men humid, which putrefies; and the moisture is quickly absorbed in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is much, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, when I discussed wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed or does not become bare flesh, it is not so unless one of these causes: among which one is because there is little blood in the body; or because evil has occurred; or because between the wound and the lips there is hard skin that prevents the natural growth of flesh; or because it is a great leesiness; or because that ulcer within itself produces pus and the material that is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in the treatment of it; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the property of the region as it is said to be so in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and healing of apostema is delayed by nature; or because there is only one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have already shown all those causes and their signs and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I must tell you that the cure for fistula is made by way of operation on me.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some are fistulas that affect the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or ciphac, or bladder, or kidneys, or at some of the ribs, or at some of the vertebrae of the back, or at some of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and foot; and from those it gives proximity to the principal member and its likenesses.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the difficult-to-cure diseases, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not permit it to reach those places that I have said, and you wait and hope for its cure, and you want to arrive at a understanding of it, then take a tentative approach with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows rectitude, and you will find it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a tentative approach using thin lead, for lead with the lightness of its own body is alleviated and curved to follow the tortuousness.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is accompanied by many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify anything over it with a tentative approach.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the orifice by its orifices, for the moisture with which you cleanse that one goes to the other orifices and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And accordingly inquire with great subtlety, according to which manner it is possible for you to know whether there are bones or nerves here, and if the fistula's affliction is distant or near, or if it is a fistula with many openings and is situated above all on the basis of your strength, your investigation, and your understanding of the patient, and the invention of pain from your compression on the location, and similar signs and causes that occur in the apostema.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with steadfast truth, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether this is an apparent fistula near at hand or in a salubrious place, distant from juncture, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have said to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you will cure the fistula according to what is said before in the narration of it, and keep this out that is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the bile and similar things, and heal it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and follows rectitude, then you must incise it as far as possible into the preone, and accordingly cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh; and accordingly administer certain enveloped medicines in acute remedies, and introduce them into the affliction of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with some frequency until the acute medicine has consumed all that remains in the affliction of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And accordingly restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you will cauterize it according to what we have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of fistula is bone and you are certain about it, then you will inquire into it and cleanse it according to what we have recounted, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, then you will remove that part until all the corruption is gone; and accordingly cure that place with something that will cover it, until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and putrefies as before, then you will know that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption; and accordingly uncover it again with great subtlety and make the reason of it and the cleansing of it according to the last remaining strength, and accordingly restore that place.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, good it is; and otherwise, you will know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and accordingly at that place there is only to let it be.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to your possibility to attract that, then you will attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you will make the extraction of all those with great subtlety, and leave not a single cause behind with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if some cause of humidity arises in your favor, and in it there is neither fear nor error, then you will incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to take out the bones at your time, then pause over that wound which will render that wound useless, and let it be until that is around those bone fragments of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and make sure the section that you have incised in your operation is constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	They have been, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice soaked in sweet oil, or a poultice of Egyptian ointment, or some of the green ointments, because when those ligaments will be softened, and the bones are separated from their absorption, and that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone like the bones of the knee or shoulder, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface so small that you can see, then you will remove that part with a reamer so small that it is behind until that corruption and blackness are removed, and accordingly restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted from it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that opening and completely excise it into the place where the corruption has occurred, and then cure that place until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you seek out someone in your own country who is a master of this craft and has experience in the art of surgery, so that you may pause over it and take counsel with him on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Find a young man of about thirty years old, to whom occurs pain in his knee joint, and on the inner side of which is swollen flesh above the material inside the bone, until the material is reached at the knee joint, and it is matter of apostema with great apostema, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore the time was extended with that error of the doctors until the apostema became hardened, and the matter was corrupted from within, and its cure was accordingly postponed, until the knee joint was fistulized, and the many orifices which were all pouring forth pus and bodily humors.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the multitude of doctors surrounded him for about two years, and none of them knew the art, until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the knee of that man and the matters that were flowing from it through those orifices into a great body; and already his whole body was quite stultified and the color of his skin was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced the tentacle into one of those orifices and proceeded to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And accordingly I examined all the openings and found those that were coming from all parts of the knee.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised over one of those openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it to be corrupted, and already it was torn and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the knee had become corrupted, having penetrated into the joint.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I shaped what was discovered and prepared from the bone that was uncovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out that which was not in the bone, but rather the corruption which had been abscessed and shaped, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And accordingly I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And accordingly I iterated and discovered again on the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And shaped what appeared to me from that corruption, and accordingly I was forced to perforate in order to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And accordingly I discovered again on the other side and did not cease to incise the small bone piece by piece particularly, and perforated the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm's width from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly I restored it with medicines, and it consolidated gradually and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of that wound and section of bone, but rather due to the disposition of the patient's flesh and the paucity of their tolerance and fear of death, for it occurred in all hours by superfluity of bad evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore the patient is healed through complete healing, and nothing remains in place of hard bone; and it has been made good the disposition of the patient in their own body, and restored to them the virtue of health; and they have been converted into their proper dispositions and do not make any contrariety in ambulation or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is bone prominence in the body already traumatized, then you must cut that according to this manner: take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it; pause that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and accordingly tie that on the flesh that remains over the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh to the remaining parts, and then uncover the flesh over the location which you wish to cut, so that the cut does not lead to the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause a fist or table over the remaining bone decently, for when you do this, it is not prohibited that the cut does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary to make the incision over the corrupted area little by little, for if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and you are forced to make another incision.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, it is better to divide it into two parts continued with each other, and the corruption is at the middle location or in one part of it, then you uncover all the flesh from all parts; and accordingly pause a fist over, and accordingly cut that of the first part where the corruption is located, until it is continued with the cutting of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, you will incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather an artifice.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the pectoral region of the arm or the chest, it is very difficult; however, you must ask yourself how the corruption appears to you, and whether you should open it, and then remove it according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and even if every artifice is rectified by you, as long as it does not cause contrariety of veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that which instruments and saws are to be used to incise these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, and their thickness, subtlety, greatness, and smallness, and hardness and rarity; so it is necessary for you to prepare all sorts of instruments suitable for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation signifies to you on the species of the instrument which you need; when with you is great study and long experience and knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of mannerisms of diseases, for then already you had them by yourself as to what is convenient to each instrument for every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will find yourself at the end of this chapter with the number of instruments which I shall pause as simple and those with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	So the head of this rey shall be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it shall be according to the form of the points of a staflegi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not necessary, but that with this instrument are confricated the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or when the mouth is great and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma de razori major dels altri:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma de razori menor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma de razori lat:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma de serra autra decentment fayta:
Forma de lu:	Forma de lu:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Forma de razori autra subtil:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Forma de incisori amb el qual són incís les osses:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Forma de un altre inscisori: aquest sembla una ray, i l'extrem de lu és com una serra, i està exposat en mots locals en la razón de los ossos:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray el qual conveneys a razio de aquel que es perforat dels ossos:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	E es fayt de ferr de India, e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de quello.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spaci a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aminstrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indica.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquella corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo that makes the skin appear in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquellas sobre drap de li.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac is mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substança e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de quello.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e Endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu in alcus nozes dels ditz.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es difficil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove that you inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, and aprop serra am una of those serras convenientz ad aquo, and aprop cura that place entro que sia sanat.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove that you secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa between aquels, o pausa between aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon that cove.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Adonc cove que tu administres purga
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l'autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu that abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que'l membre sia scalfat.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu that times that roga declinant to negror.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca que sia corda.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la parti
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E cum aquela tota auras fora-getida, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sant.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Forma de unci orp:	The phrase "Forma de unci orp" suggests that this passage is describing the shape or form of a fine thread or string (unci orp) used for tying off or stitching.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	This passage is describing the characteristics of a thread or string (unci orp) that is not too fine or thin (no es a lu accuitat) like some other threads, but rather has a moderate thickness and flexibility (grossa flexibilitat leon). This is because if it were too thin, it would be likely to cut into the vein (inscidira la vena) due to its subtlety.
De extraccio venae cruris.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This passage is describing the origin or formation of the vein (Aquesta vena) in certain regions or territories. The author mentions that this vein is generated in the legs (cambas) in areas with cold and dry climates, similar to the Ategi region in Arabic lands and the arid and barren regions of India, where there is little vegetation or water (ni aybre).
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	This passage suggests that while the vein is generated in the legs (cambas) in certain regions, it can also be found in other parts of the body (fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors) apart from the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	This passage describes the process of putrefaction (gestacio) that occurs when the vein is damaged or removed. The author suggests that the flesh (codena) becomes rotten and decaying, releasing a foul-smelling pus (venen) from within the body, similar to the way in which serpents, worms, and other creatures infest the area between the vein and the surrounding tissue (entre la codena e la carn).
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	This passage describes the signs and symptoms of the onset of varicose veins (senhal de la suscepcio de l'adveniment de lu). The author suggests that one of the key indicators is a sudden and intense inflammation in the leg (enflammacio vehement) at the location where the vein will appear. This inflammation causes the skin to become vesiculated, or blistered, and eventually, the affected vein begins to emerge from this blistery area, resembling a plant's root (quays sembla razit de planta).
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when his extremity appears, you should wrap around it a lead ball weighing one drachma and two-thirds of a drachma, and not touch the lead and let it hang from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	This passage appears to be the final instruction in the text. The author suggests that whenever you notice any cause or issue (alcuna causa) outside of the treated area, wrap it with leaden pess (envolveys aquo em plom) and loosen it (noza aquel).
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	This passage appears to be describing a scenario where the varicose vein is not fully removed and there is still some tissue left behind (mot es prolonguat). The author suggests that in this case, you should make an incision (inscideys) into one side of the remaining tissue, wrap up the rest (envolopa le romanent), and avoid cutting too deeply (no inscidas aquela de razit) until all the affected tissue is removed (entro que sia fora yssida).
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	This passage emphasizes the importance of treating the varicose vein with care and caution. The author suggests that it is necessary to extract the affected tissue gradually (suaument) and carefully, little by little (petit a petit), until all of it is removed (entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu).
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	This passage describes the process of treating varicose veins (medicacio) and emphasizes the importance of prompt intervention when the vein is cut or injured. The author suggests that if the vein is inscided (cut) during treatment, it's crucial to:
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This passage describes the appearance and behavior of varicose veins. The author notes that these veins sometimes form clusters (motz ramps) and are most commonly found at the junction of the foot or in the leg (quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe).
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	The final sentence!
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	The final instruction!
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	The final warning!
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	The final advice!
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	The final sentence!
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	The final sentence!
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	The final sentence!
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	The final sentence!
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	The final sentence!
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	The final sentence!
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	The final sentence!
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	The final sentence!
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	The final sentence!
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	The final sentence!
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	The final sentence!
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	The final sentence!
De extraccio de sagetas.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of our medieval text!
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	It seems we've stumbled upon a fascinating passage about arrows (sagetas) in the medieval text!
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	The passage is describing the characteristics of arrows (sagetas) that target specific body parts (membres) and organs (pessas), such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, bladder, and kidneys.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a severe arrow wound (senhals del servel) when it pierces the skull (os) and reaches the cerebral cortex (cyphac).
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	The passage is cautioning that if the above symptoms and signs appear, it's best to avoid attempting to treat or remove the arrow (curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta) unless it's impossible to leave it in place.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the heart (cor).
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the lung (pulmo).
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the thigh (velament).
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the stomach (stomac).
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the abdomen (ventre).
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of a arrow wound that has pierced the bladder (vesica).
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The passage is describing the symptoms and signs of an arrow wound that has missed vital organs and only affected other parts of the body.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	The passage is concluding by stating that the author has seen the effects of these arrow wounds and is now sharing their observations with the reader.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The passage is describing a specific case of an arrow wound and its treatment.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	The passage is continuing the story of a patient who was struck by an arrow and the author's role in treating the wound.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The passage is concluding the story of the Jew who was struck by an arrow and the author's role in treating the wound.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and the author's role in treating it.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and the author's role in treating it.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and its treatment.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and its treatment.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	The passage is describing another story of an arrow wound and its treatment.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	The passage is describing the removal of an arrow (sageta) from the nose (nas) of a prince or high-ranking nobleman.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The passage is describing the timeline for the treatment of the arrow wound.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	The passage is describing the treatment of the arrow wound and the author's observations.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	The passage is describing the treatment of the wound and the author's observations.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	The passage is describing the healing process of the wound and the author's observations.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	The passage is describing the treatment of the wound and the author's observations.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	The passage is describing the author's experience with the wound and the arrow.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	The passage is describing the author's experience with the wound and the process of removing the arrow.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The passage is describing the outcome of the treatment and the patient's recovery.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	The passage is concluding the story and providing guidance to the reader.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The passage is concluding the story and emphasizing the importance of continuous learning and improvement.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	The passage is concluding the story and providing a summary of the two ways that arrows can be removed from the body.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	The passage is describing the second way that arrows can be removed from the body.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	The passage is describing the consequences of not following the guidelines for removing an arrow from the body.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	The passage is describing the consequences of not following the guidelines for removing an arrow from the body when it is embedded in bone.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	The passage is describing the consequences of not following the guidelines for removing an arrow from the body when it is embedded in bone.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	The passage is describing the consequences of not removing an arrow from the skull that has entered one of the ventricles of the brain.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	The passage is describing the situation where an arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull, but has not entered the cerebral cavity.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	The passage is describing the situation where an arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull and will not come out with normal extraction methods.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	The passage is describing the situation where an arrow has become lodged in the body and is hidden from view.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	The passage is describing the situation where it is difficult to remove an arrow from the body due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the projectile.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	The passage is describing the situation where the arrow has become lodged in a sensitive area of the body, such as the ear.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	The passage is describing the process of removing an arrow from the body.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	The passage is describing the situation where the arrow cannot be removed immediately.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	The passage is describing what to do if bleeding occurs while attempting to remove an arrow from the body.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	The passage is describing the importance of preserving one's skill and expertise in medical procedures, such as arrow removal.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	The passage is describing the process of carefully removing an arrow from the body.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	The passage is describing what to do if it is not possible to carefully remove the arrow in its original shape.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The passage is describing the process of removing an arrow that has become stuck or lodged in the body.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	The passage is describing the process of removing an arrow that has become stuck in bone.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	The passage is describing what to do if the arrow cannot be removed immediately.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	The passage is describing what to do if the point of the arrow (fust) is lodged in a sensitive area.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	The passage is describing what to do if the point of the arrow (fust) has become lodged and refuses to be removed by gentle pushing.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	The passage is describing what to do if the arrow (sageta) has a concave shape.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	The passage is describing what to do if the arrow (sageta) has become embedded in the body.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The passage is describing what to do if the arrow (sageta) has become lodged in various parts of the body.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The passage is describing the shape and design of forceps that are suitable for extracting arrows.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The passage is describing the shape of the forceps, specifically the ends (extremitatz) that are designed to grasp and hold onto the arrow (sageta).
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	The passage is describing the different types of forceps (faytas) that are designed to extract arrows from the body.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The passage is describing the shape and design of the curved instrument (impellent concau) that is used to extract arrows from the body.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The passage is describing the shape and design of a blunt-tipped instrument (impellent) that is used to carefully remove an arrow from the body.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	The passage is describing the shape and design of the instrument (ray) used to extract an arrow from a concave surface.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	The passage is discussing the procedure of cutting off (botomy) the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The passage appears to be discussing the procedure of cutting off (botomy) certain veins. The passage continues: The passage continues:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The passage continues: The passage continues:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	The passage continues:
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The passage continues:
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	The passage continues:
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	The passage continues:
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	The passage continues:
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	The passage continues:
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	The passage continues:
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The passage continues:
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	The passage continues:
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	The passage continues:
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	The passage continues:
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The passage continues:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The passage continues:
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	The passage continues:
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The passage continues:
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	The passage continues:
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The passage continues:
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The passage continues:
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	The passage continues:
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The passage continues:
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The passage continues:
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	The passage continues:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The passage continues:
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	The passage continues:
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	The passage continues:
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	The passage continues:
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The passage continues:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The passage continues:
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	The passage continues:
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The passage continues:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The passage continues:
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The passage appears to be a recipe or formula for preparing a type of bloodletting instrument called "fleubotomi mirti". The text is written in an archaic style and uses terminology that is no longer commonly used in modern medicine.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The passage continues:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	The passage continues:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	The passage continues:
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The passage continues:
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	The passage continues:
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	The passage continues:
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The passage continues:
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	The passage continues:
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	The passage continues:
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The passage continues:
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	The passage continues:
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	The passage continues:
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The passage continues:
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The passage continues:
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The passage continues:
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	The passage continues:
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The passage continues:
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	The passage continues:
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	The passage continues:
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	The passage continues:
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The passage continues:
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The passage continues:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	The passage continues:
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The passage continues:
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The passage continues:
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	The passage continues:
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	The passage continues:
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	The passage continues:
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	The passage continues:
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	The passage continues:
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	The passage continues:
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	The passage continues:
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	The passage continues:
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	The passage continues:
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The passage continues:
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	The passage continues:
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The passage continues:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	The passage concludes:
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	The passage concludes:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	The passage concludes:
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	The final sentence:
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	The passage continues:
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	The passage continues:
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	The final sentence:
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	The passage continues:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	The passage continues:
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	The passage concludes:
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	The passage concludes:
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The passage concludes:
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	The passage concludes:
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The passage concludes:
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	The passage concludes:
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	The passage concludes:
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	The passage concludes:
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	The passage concludes:
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The passage concludes:
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	The passage concludes:
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	The passage concludes:
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	The passage concludes:
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	The passage concludes:
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	The passage concludes:
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	The passage concludes:
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	The passage concludes:
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	The passage concludes:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	The passage concludes:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	The passage concludes:
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The passage concludes:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	The passage concludes:
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	The passage concludes:
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The passage concludes:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The passage concludes:
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The passage concludes:
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The passage concludes:
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	The passage concludes:
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	The passage concludes:
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The passage concludes:
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The passage concludes:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The passage concludes:
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	The passage concludes:
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	The passage concludes:
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	The passage concludes:
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The passage concludes:
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	The passage concludes:
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The passage concludes:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The passage concludes:
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	The passage concludes:
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	The passage concludes:
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	The passage concludes:
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	The passage concludes:
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	The passage concludes:
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	The passage concludes:
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	The passage concludes:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The passage concludes:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The passage concludes:
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	The passage concludes:
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	The passage concludes:
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	The passage concludes:
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	The passage concludes:
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The passage concludes:
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The passage continues:
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The passage continues:
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	The passage continues:
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The passage continues:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The passage concludes:
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	The passage concludes:
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The passage concludes:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	The passage concludes:
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The passage concludes:
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	The passage concludes:
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	The passage concludes:
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	The passage concludes:
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The passage concludes:
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The passage concludes:
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The passage concludes:
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The passage concludes:
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	The passage concludes:
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The passage concludes:
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The passage concludes:
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The passage concludes:
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	The passage concludes:
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	The passage concludes:
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	The passage concludes:
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The passage concludes:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	The passage concludes:
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	The passage concludes:
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The passage concludes:
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	The passage concludes:
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	The passage concludes:
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	The passage concludes:
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	The passage concludes:
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	The passage concludes:
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	The passage concludes:
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	The passage concludes:
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	The passage concludes:
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	The passage concludes:
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The passage concludes:
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	The passage concludes:
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	The passage concludes:
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	The passage concludes:
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The passage concludes:
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	The passage concludes:
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The passage concludes:
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	The passage concludes:
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	The passage concludes:
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	The passage concludes:
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	The passage concludes:
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	The passage concludes:
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	The passage concludes:
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The passage concludes:
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	The passage concludes:
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The passage concludes:
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	The passage concludes:
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	The passage concludes:
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	The passage concludes:
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The passage concludes:
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The passage concludes:
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The passage concludes:
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	The passage concludes:
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	The passage concludes:
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The passage concludes:
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The passage concludes:
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	The passage concludes:
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	The passage concludes:
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	The passage concludes:
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	The passage concludes:
Capitol .xcvii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The final sentence of the text!
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The final sentence of the text!
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	The final sentence of the text!
E cum son umplidas e caso.	The very last sentence!
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	The very last sentence!
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	The final sentence!
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	The final sentence!
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	The final sentence!
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	The final sentence!
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	The final sentence!
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	The final sentence!
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	The final line!
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	The final sentence!
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	The final sentence!
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	The final sentence!
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	The final sentence!
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	The final sentence!
Capitol primier.	The very first sentence of the text!
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The beginning of the text!
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	The opening sentence of the text!
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	The text is discussing the importance of considering various factors when a person experiences a fracture or dislocation!
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	The text is discussing the importance of diet and nutrition in recovery from an injury!
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	The text is discussing the importance of returning to one's usual routine after recovering from an illness!
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	The text is discussing the importance of nutrition in promoting bone healing!
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The text is discussing the importance of understanding the natural process of bone aging and decay!
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	The text is discussing the natural process of bone aging and decay, emphasizing the idea that bones continue to deteriorate over time!
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The text is discussing the natural process of bone healing and repair!
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	The text is discussing the importance of diet in bone healing and repair!
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The text is discussing the diversity of fractures based on the affected limb!
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The text is discussing the diversity of fractures based on the specific limb affected!
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	The text is concluding by emphasizing the importance of recalling all types of fractures and their corresponding descriptions!
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The text is emphasizing the diversity of fractures!
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The text is discussing the diversity of fractures and their various types!
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The text is discussing the unique characteristics of each type of fracture and their corresponding restorative processes!
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	The text is discussing a distinctive sign or characteristic of bone fractures!
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The text is discussing the signs and symptoms of a bone fracture!
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	The text is discussing the diagnosis of a bone fracture!
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	The text is discussing the possibility of a small crack or fissure, rather than a significant fracture!
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The text is discussing the importance of correcting a curved bone when it is not fractured or split in two!
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	The text is discussing what to do if an infection or apostema occurs!
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The text is discussing the ease of restoring and straightening a curved bone!
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	The text is emphasizing the importance of remembering and recalling the specific characteristics of the bone being corrected!
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	The text is discussing the need for external support when correcting a curved bone that is connected to a vertebra!
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	The text is discussing the importance of returning the broken member to its natural position and shape!
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	The text is discussing the importance of being careful and gentle when performing an operation on a broken bone, in order to avoid causing further injury or damage!
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	The text is discussing the importance of using one's skills and abilities to correct a broken bone!
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	The text is warning against excessive stretching and compression, which can lead to infection or tissue damage!
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The text is discussing the importance of proper positioning and movement after a broken bone has been corrected!
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The text is discussing the importance of proper stabilization and support after a broken bone has been corrected!
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The text is discussing the importance of using a thin layer of cloth to wrap around small bones!
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The text is discussing the importance of using a thicker layer of cloth to wrap around larger bones!
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	The text is discussing the importance of carefully wrapping and securing a broken bone with three or four layers of cloth, depending on the size and shape of the bone!
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	The text is discussing the importance of carefully checking and securing the wrapping at the highest point of the fracture site to ensure proper healing!
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	The text is discussing the process of gradually stretching and releasing tension from the wrapping around the fracture site!
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	The text is discussing the process of adding additional layers of wrapping around the fracture site!
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The text is discussing the importance of pausing between layers of wrapping to prevent the fracture from becoming tangled or twisted!
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	The text is discussing the process of wrapping and securing a fracture, with a focus on preventing infection or swelling!
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The text is describing the shape and size of the star-shaped folds (stelhas) used in the wrapping process.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	The text is discussing the importance of using a larger and thicker star-shaped fold (astelha) over the fracture site, and adjusting the size and shape of the stars according to the size and shape of the member.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The text is discussing the importance of using fine and subtle threads (fils) in the binding process.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	The text is discussing the limitations of using fine and subtle threads (fils) in the binding process.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The text is discussing the importance of padding or cushioning between the edges of the stars and the binding to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	The text is discussing the importance of careful consideration and attention to detail when treating a fracture.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	The text is discussing the importance of not rushing to apply stars (stelhas) to a broken limb on the first day, especially if the limb is large.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	The text is discussing the method used by ancient physicians to apply bandages (emplaustres) over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The text is discussing the method of applying a type of bandage (emplaustra) to treat fractures, which is particularly suitable for women and children because it does not produce heat or cold.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	The text is suggesting that the method of applying the bandage (emplaustra) should be done in a gentle and subtle manner, so as not to cause discomfort or pain.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the essence of marshmallow, one drachma each; of myrrh and aloes, one drachma each five; of aloe, twenty drachmas; all are triturated and sifted and mixed with water or album of white egg if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, for it has good composition and restores broken bones gently, and gives strength to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for plastering which gives strength to fractures and twists: recipe of myrrh and white alum, one drachma each ten; of myrrh and aloes, one drachma each five; of acacia, six drachmas; of Armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The final sentence!
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The final recipe!
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The final sentence!
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for making a bandage (emplastre) that restores broken bones!
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A shortcut method for making a bandage (emplastre) that promotes the restoration of fractures and reduces the remaining signs of apostema! The final instructions!
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	A cautionary note!
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for making a stronger bandage (emplasta) that can help resolve apostema and restore the member!
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	A cautionary note from Hippocrates himself!
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A reference to Galen!
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A recipe for making an emplastre that can help with injuries and pain!
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	A cautionary note!
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	A warning about potential complications!
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	A recipe for treating pain and inflammation!
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	A final instruction!
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	A final note!
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	A final note on duration! A note on duration and healing!
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	A final note on adjustments!
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	A note on nutrition and healing!
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	A cautionary note on the importance of proper treatment!
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	A conclusion!
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	A new chapter!
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	A description of the different types of fractures!
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	A description of the wound or damage caused by these two types of fractures!
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	A description of the fracture and its wound!
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	A description of the fracture!
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	A description of the fracture!
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	A description of the fracture and its effects!
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	A conclusion about the various types of fractures!
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	A final statement!
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	A conclusion about the types of fractures!
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A description of the capillary fracture!
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	A discussion of the treatment of fractures!
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	A conclusion about the treatment of fractures!
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	A description of one of the two methods of operation!
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	A continuation of the description of one of the two methods of operation!
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	A description of the different inscribers used in the procedure!
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	A description of how to use the inscribers!
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	A description of how to handle a strong and hard bone!
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	A further description of the non-profound taravels!
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	A discussion of the importance of having a variety of taravels!
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	A description of the three types of taravels!
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	A description of how to use the taravels with inscribers!
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	A warning about the importance of caution when using inscribers!
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	A description of how to extract the bone and shape it with an instrument similar to an inscriber!
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	A description of how to handle small bone fragments and care for the wound!
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	A description of the second method of operation!
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	A description of the shape and position of the lenticular part of the bone!
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	A warning about the importance of caution and attention to detail when performing the procedure!
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	A description of how to handle any remaining attached bone fragments!
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	A description of how to handle the bone fragments that remain outside the pannicol!
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	A description of the process of administering the bone fragments!
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	A description of how to administer the bone fragments in cases of smaller fractures!
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	A statement about the importance of studying in order to master the art!
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	A statement about how to proceed with a specific type of fracture!
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	A description of how to apply dressings and bandages to the wound!
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	A description of how to care for the wound and administer medication!
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	A description of how to prepare and administer medication!
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	A warning about the importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection!
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	A warning about the potential consequences of not properly treating a wound!
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	A description of how to treat a wound with a darkening or discoloration! A description of how to apply a dressing and administer care to the wound!
Capitol .iii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	A new topic!
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	A fascinating discussion about the anatomy of the nose!
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	A discussion about how to repair a broken nose!
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	A warning about the importance of caution and skill in performing a medical procedure!
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	A discussion about how to treat a fracture in the upper part of the nose!
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	A discussion about how to treat a fracture that is split into two parts!
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	A discussion about how to treat and restore the nose after a fracture!
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	A discussion about how to apply a dressing to the nose after a fracture!
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	A discussion about the application of dressings and the importance of patience in allowing the bone to heal!
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	A discussion about how to apply dressings and pads to the nose after a fracture!
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	A discussion about whether or not to apply dressings and pads to the nose after a fracture!
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	A discussion about how to treat an abscess (apostema) in the nose!
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	A discussion about how to treat the nose if it is not infected with an abscess!
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	A discussion about how to treat a nasal fracture!
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	A discussion about how to treat a nasal pungency!
Capitol .iiii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	A new chapter!
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	A detailed description of the jawbone fracture!
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	A detailed description of the treatment for jawbone fractures!
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	A discussion about how to treat a more severe jawbone fracture!
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	A discussion about how to treat tooth displacement and dental trauma!
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	A final piece of advice!
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	A final piece of advice on how to correct any deformities that may have arisen during the healing process!
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	A final piece of advice on how to maintain the dressing and ensure proper healing!
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	A final piece of advice on how to treat abscesses that may develop during the healing process!
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	A final piece of advice on how to treat fractures with bleeding!
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	A final piece of advice on how to treat fractures with bleeding!
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	A final piece of advice on how to treat fractures with bleeding!
Capitol .v.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	A new chapter!
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	A discussion about the types of fractures that can occur in the clavicle!
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	A discussion about the different types of fractures that can occur in the clavicle!
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	A description of the surgical procedure for treating a fractured clavicle with bleeding!
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	A description of the surgical procedure for removing loose fragments (satagias) from a fractured clavicle!
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	A description of the surgical procedure for removing loose fragments (retenguda) from the fractured clavicle!
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	A description of the surgical instrument used to remove loose fragments from the fractured clavicle!
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	A description of the surgical instrument used to remove loose fragments from the fractured clavicle!
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	A description of the surgical procedure for closing a wound (plagua) after removing loose bone fragments (satagia)!
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	A description of the surgical procedure for closing a wound (plagua) after removing loose bone fragments (satagia)!
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	A description of a medicinal treatment for infection (apostema caut)!
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	A detailed description of a medicinal treatment for bone fractures (strictura del os)!
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	A cautionary note about the importance of monitoring the healing process!
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	A description of the importance of proper sleep positioning!
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	A note about removing the bandage!
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	A note about renewing the dressing!
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	A note about the healing process!
Capitol .vi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	It looks like we've reached the final chapter of the text: "De restauracio de fractura de la spalla"!
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A note about the shape of the shoulder blade!
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	A note about the importance of careful preparation and reduction!
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	A note about the application of materials for wound care!
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	A note about shaping the tablecloth-like material!
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	A note about securing the layers!
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	A note about checking and adjusting the bandage!
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	A note about patient care!
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	A note about the recovery time!
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	A note about the final stage of recovery!
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	A note about the final stages of treatment!
Capitol .vii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	The final chapter!
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	A note about the shape of the foot!
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	A note about the symptoms of foot fracture!
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	A note about the treatment and recovery process!
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	A note about the application of dressings and splints!
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	A note about dealing with complications!
Capitol .viii.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	The final chapter!
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	A note about rib fractures!
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	A note about diagnosis!
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	A note about treatment!
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	A note about severe cases!
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The final sentence!
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	A note about treatment!
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	A note about caution!
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	A note about the dangers of wind!
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	A note about treatment!
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	A note about surgical treatment!
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	A note about wound care!
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	A note about treating abscesses!
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	A note about rest and recovery!
Capitol .ix.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The final chapter!
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	A note about the spine!
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	A note about the prognosis!
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	A note about the healing process!
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	A note about the importance of careful observation!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	A note about the gravity of the situation!
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	A note about the importance of proper diagnosis!
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	A note about the treatment of abscesses!
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	A note about the importance of rest and relaxation!
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	A note about surgical treatment!
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	A note about setting broken bones!
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	A note about treating lacerations!
Capitol .x.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la ancha.	The final chapter!
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	A note about bone fractures!
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	A note about treating bone fractures!
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	A note about setting bone fractures!
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	A note about preparing the patient for treatment!
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	A note about applying splints!
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	A note about setting the splint!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	A note about treating abscesses!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	A note about treating bone fractures!
Capitol .xi.	We've reached the end of the text!
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	The final chapter!
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	So "adjutori" refers to the ribcage or thoracic cage, which is the bony structure that protects the organs in the chest cavity.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	A note about treating ribcage fractures!
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	A note about applying the splint!
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	A note about positioning the patient!
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	A note about treating the fracture!
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	A note about another treatment method!
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	A note about strengthening the treatment!
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	A note about treating fractures near the end of a muscle!
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	A note about treating fractures near the ribcage!
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	A note about applying the treatment with ease and effort!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	A note about treating abscesses!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	A note about strengthening the treatment!
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	A note about securing the treatment!
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	The final sentence!
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	The final details of the treatment!
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	The final flourish!
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The final detail!
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The final note!
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	The final instruction!
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	The final warning!
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	The final warning!
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	The final caution!
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The final detail!
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	The final instruction!
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The final instruction!
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The final statement!
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	The final warning!
Capitol .xii.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	A new chapter!
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The anatomy of the arm!
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	Fractures in the arm!
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The treatment of a radius fracture!
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The treatment of a humerus fracture!
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	The treatment of a bilateral humerus fracture!
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	The treatment of a radius fracture!
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The treatment of a humerus fracture!
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	The treatment of a bilateral humerus fracture!
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The treatment and positioning of the arm!
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	The placement of the cushion!
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The extension of the arm!
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The alignment of the bone!
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	The correction of the bone!
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	The correction of a separated stump!
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	The treatment of a wound!
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	The treatment of an abscess!
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The identification of the number of stelhas in the arm!
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	The application of the stricture!
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The preparation of the dressings!
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	The importance of considering the member and ligament!
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	The treatment of complications!
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	The treatment of inflammation!
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	The final stage of treatment!
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	The importance of nutrition!
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	The recovery period!
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	The final stage of treatment!
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	The conclusion!
Capitol .xiii.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The next chapter is all about treating fractures of the fingers and toes!
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	The importance of gentle treatment!
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	The treatment of hand fractures!
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The extension and realignment of broken bones!
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	The application of emplastre and estopa!
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The treatment of the palmar surface!
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	The application of the steel plate!
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	The treatment of fractures on the outside of the hand!
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	The treatment of fractures in the toes!
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	The treatment of fractures in other fingers!
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	The importance of considering the patient's condition and potential complications!
Capitol .xiv.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The treatment of hip fractures!
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The diagnosis of hip fractures!
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The treatment of hip fractures!
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The extension of the ligament!
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	The extension of the ligament in hip fractures!
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	The extension of the ligament in hip fractures!
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The final stages of treatment!
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	The treatment of abscesses!
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The application of the bandage!
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	The application of the splint!
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	The application of the splint!
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	The application of padding!
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	The application of the bandage!
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	The extension of the splint!
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	The final steps!
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	The final verdict!
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	The final words!
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	The importance of proper treatment!
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The timeline of recovery!
Capitol .xv.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	The restoration of the fracture of the deltoid!
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The nature of deltoid fractures!
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	The nature of deltoid fractures (continued)!
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the deltoid fracture!
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	The final steps!
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	The final consideration!
Capitol .xvi.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The restoration of the fracture of the leg!
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	The anatomy of the leg!
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	The types of fractures in the leg!
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	The consequences of two bones being fractured together!
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	The consequences of the subtler bone being fractured!
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	The consequences of the thicker bone being fractured!
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	The final instructions!
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	The final words!
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	The final instructions for the leg!
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	The final wrapping instructions!
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	The final instructions for the stars!
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	The final instructions for the leg!
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The final message!
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The final words of wisdom!
Capitol .xvii.	The final chapter!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The fracture of the ankle and foot bones!
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The fracture patterns of the ankle and foot!
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	The instructions for treating a fractured foot!
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	The instructions for treating a fractured foot (continued)!
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	The instructions for treating fractured toes!
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	The instructions for treating a fractured toe!
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	The instructions for treating multiple toe fractures!
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	The final instructions!
Capitol .xviii.	The final chapter!
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	The final chapter!
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	The treatment of a fractured cranium in a female!
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The treatment of a fractured cranium in a female (continued)!
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	The treatment of a fractured cranium in a female (continued)!
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	The final instructions!
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	The final instructions!
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	The final instructions!
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The final instructions!
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The final instructions!
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	The final instructions for the treatment of fractures in men!
Capitol .xix.	The final chapter of the book!
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	The final chapter!
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	The importance of proper treatment when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	The importance of controlling the bleeding when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	The importance of prompt treatment when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	The importance of patience when dealing with fractures accompanied by plague!
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	The importance of reducing and equalizing the fractured bone when it is prominent above the skin!
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	The importance of using the right tools and techniques when treating fractures!
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	The importance of precision and control when performing surgical procedures!
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	The importance of careful consideration when making decisions!
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	It seems we've reached the end of the text!
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The final phrase!
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The final instruction!
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	The final instruction!
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	The final instruction!
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	The final instruction!
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The final phrase!
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	The final sentence!
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The final sentence!
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	The final sentence!
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	The final sentence!
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	The final sentence!
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	The final sentence!
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	The final sentence!
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	The final sentence!
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	The final sentence!
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	The final sentence!
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	The final sentence!
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	The final sentence! The final sentence!
Capitol .xx.	It seems we've reached the final chapter (Capitol) of the ancient text!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The title of the 20th chapter!
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The start of the 20th chapter!
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat the swelling (nodacio) that has occurred after a bone fracture.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The author is providing additional guidance on how to treat the swelling (nodacio) that has occurred after a bone fracture.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat the swelling (nodacio) that has become inflamed and hardened.
Capitol .xxi.	The title of the 21st chapter!
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	The title of the 21st chapter!
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	The text continues to discuss the reasons why a fractured bone may not be restored to its natural state, even after healing.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The text continues to provide guidance on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The text continues to provide guidance on how to promote healing and recovery after a fracture.
Capitol .xxii.	The title of the 22nd chapter!
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The title of the 22nd chapter!
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The text continues to provide guidance on how to promote healing after a bone fracture.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	The text takes a critical tone towards certain medical practitioners and restorers.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	The text continues to provide guidance on how to treat fractures and related conditions.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	The text provides guidance on how to treat fractures and related conditions.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	The text provides guidance on how to treat fractures and related conditions.
Capitol .xxiii.	The title of the 23rd chapter!
De sermo en dislocacio.	The title of the 23rd chapter!
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The text begins to discuss the topic of dislocation.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	The text emphasizes the importance of prompt reduction in cases of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The text warns against delaying the reduction of dislocation during the acute phase.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	The text provides guidance on how to treat dislocation when it occurs.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	The text emphasizes the importance of proper care for the entire affected limb.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	The text concludes by summarizing the chapters on dislocation.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The final chapter is about the treatment of a dislocation of the jawbone (mandible) from below.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The final chapter provides guidance on how to treat a dislocation of the jawbone (mandible) from below.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The final sentence!
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	The final sentence!
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The final sentence!
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	The final sentence!
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	The final sentence!
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The final sentence!
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The final sentence!
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	The final sentence!
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	The final sentence!
Capitol .xxv.	The next chapter!
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The next chapter!
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The text continues!
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The text continues!
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The text continues!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	The text continues!
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The final sentence!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	The final sentence!
Capitol .xxvi.	The next chapter!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The next chapter!
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The text begins to describe the different ways in which a muscle can be dislocated.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The text continues to describe the different ways in which a muscle can be dislocated.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The text continues to describe the characteristics of muscle dislocation.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The text continues to describe the effects of muscle dislocation.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	The final sentence!
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The final sentence!
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	The final sentence!
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The final sentence!
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The final instructions!
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	The final instructions!
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The final instructions!
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	The final instructions!
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	The final sentence!
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The final method!
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	The final remedy!
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	The final instruction!
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The final step!
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The final position!
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	The final instructions!
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The final advice!
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The final conclusion!
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	The final statement!
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	The final warning!
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The final instruction!
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The final prescription!
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	The final advice!
Capitol .xxvii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	The final topic!
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The final statement!
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	The final warning!
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The final restoration!
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The final nuance!
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	The final resort!
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	The final confirmation!
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The final detail!
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	The final push!
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The final rest!
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	The final release!
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	The final iteration!
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	The final touches!
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The final treatment!
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred within the bone marrow instrument before it is linen-wrapped.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	The final touch!
Capitol .xxviii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The final sentence!
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The final warning!
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The final reduction!
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	The final consideration!
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	The final warning!
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The final words!
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	The final instructions!
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The final advice!
Capitol .xxix.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The final words!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	The final sentence!
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	The final instruction!
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	The final words!
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	The final words!
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	The final instruction!
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	The final words!
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	The final sentence!
Capitol .xxx.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The final words!
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	The final warning!
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The final words!
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	The final sentence!
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The final warning!
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	The final words!
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	The final sentence!
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The final sentence!
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	The final sentence!
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The final sentence!
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The final sentence!
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	The final sentence!
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The final sentence!
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	The final sentence!
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	The final sentence!
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	The final sentence!
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final sentence!
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	The final sentence!
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The final sentence!
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	The final sentence!
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	The final sentence!
Capitol .xxxi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the book!
De curacio de anca dislocada.	The title of the next section!
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The text is making some important distinctions!
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The text is describing the different types of dislocations that can occur in the hip joint!
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The text is emphasizing that the hip joint is most commonly dislocated inwards (towards the body), rather than outwards or backwards.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The text is describing a symptom of hip dislocation!
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The text is describing another symptom of hip dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The text is describing another symptom of hip dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The text is describing another symptom of hip dislocation!
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The text is discussing the reduction of dislocation!
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	The text is discussing the reduction of dislocation in recent cases!
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	The text is discussing alternative methods for reducing dislocation!
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The text is describing the extension of the hip joint!
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The text is describing the extension of all those in one go, until the patient is elevated to their full height and remains suspended!
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	The text is stating that this type of extension is common to all four types!
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	The text is stating that if the dislocation returns to its original state after treatment, then it's good; but if not, then additional measures are necessary for each specific type of dislocation!
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	The text is describing the reduction process for hip dislocation!
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The text is describing the reduction process for hip dislocation, continued!
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	The text is stating that this type of reduction is the easiest and most straightforward way to cure hip dislocation!
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	The text is describing an alternative approach if the patient is not willing to follow the instructions for this type of reduction!
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	The text is describing the length of each foot and the extent of the affected hip!
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The text is describing the patient's position and the length of their leg!
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation!
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation when it occurs on the outside!
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	The text is describing the setup for reducing a hip dislocation!
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The text is describing the final step in reducing a hip dislocation!
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	The text is summarizing the importance of following the instructions for reducing a hip dislocation!
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The final sentence!
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation when it occurs in front!
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	The text is describing the process of reducing a hip dislocation when it occurs in back!
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The text is describing the application of compression!
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	The text is describing the final steps of reducing a hip dislocation!
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	The text is describing the final step of reducing a hip dislocation!
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	The text is describing the final confirmation of a successful reduction!
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	The text is describing a situation where the patient may still require further treatment!
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	The text is describing the final step of patient recovery!
Capitol .xxxii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The title of the chapter!
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	A final summary!
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The final sign of hip dislocation!
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The final steps of treatment!
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The final sign of reduction!
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The final steps of treatment!
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The final advice!
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	The final twist!
Capitol .xxxiii.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The final topic!
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The final details!
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The final sign!
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The final cure!
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The final guidance!
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	The final instructions!
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	The final movement!
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	The final repetition!
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	The final push!
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	The final conclusion!
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	The final instruction!
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The final details!
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The final application of the technique!
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	The final step!
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	The final caution!
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	The final instruction!
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The final prohibition!
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	The final warning!
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	The final note!
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The final section!
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The final guidance!
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	The final instruction!
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	The final adjustment!
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The final steps!
Capitol .xxxv.	The final chapter!
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The final topic!
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	The final warning!
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The final wisdom!
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	The final effort!
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The final administration!
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	The final treatment!
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	The final exhortation!
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	The final blessing!
Amen.	The final "Amen"!
