Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The words of Albuquisim begin thus.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, now I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, since its completion has led to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that you will be able to understand that treatise, which is a part of my operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For my operation is scattered throughout our region and in our time, deprived of everything, so that the science of it is very much endangered, and its investigation remains stalled; and there remain no more than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been corrupted by many errors and confusions, until their intentions are sealed and the force of it and the art are exhausted.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it appears to me that you should bring this order of the treatise to life through the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that I may provide the forms of surgical instruments and other tools of the craft, as well as add to the declaration and prepare for it, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his own hand in our present time, is because the art of medicine is long and complex, and one who wishes to be proficient in it must first be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was known by Galen, so that he may know the joints of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their arrangement; and of the pulsing and quiet veins, and the locations where they are inserted.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And therefore says Hippocrates that with a great name comes little honor, but most of all in the craft of one's hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already spoken of him in the introduction to this book; for one who is not knowledgeable about anatomy as we have described it, will not be spared from falling into error which will cause men's deaths, just as I have seen many of them, since some are formed in this science and think they know it without true knowledge or experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who had inserted an abscess in the neck of a woman, and had cut through some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out, until the woman died among her companions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who had applied a poultice to a man's wound, which was great and had progressed in his condition, and the poultice came loose from his skin, so that that man died three days later.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you yourself had previously said that it would not work out for this one, and I saw that because of the great size of the wound and the patient's condition, you knew he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took pay from a duke of our land for surgery, and endeavored to set the fracture of a blacksmith on his leg; but the doctor's ignorance was revealed, as he extracted the fracture, placing it above the wound with pillows and bandages with excessive tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he undid the binding according to his own desires, and then he re-wrapped it, and then he left it for some days and commanded us to undo the binding; and thus it was that the leg and foot became inflamed, and it led to perdition.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you were called to him, and I helped you to undo the binding, and thus we achieved quietness and he became relieved of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But nonetheless the corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained and did not cease to spread its corruption in the member until the patient was imperiled.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who had pierced a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated about three days later, so that the evil of it was magnified with its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the cancerous abscess is pure of melancholic humor, therefore it does not need to be treated with iron from head to toe, but rather should be treated as a member that has been entirely possessed by evil.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of my craft be divided into two parts: one is in operation which is associated with health, and the other is a work where there is peril in the greater dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in every place of this book where the operation is one that involves error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep guard over this and leave behind those who do not understand, lest they should not know how to speak and to desecrate.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your own arms with zeal and protection of God, and your own patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way with the grace of God to achieve salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside terrible diseases that are difficult to cure, and keep your own arms from this which makes you fear, so that the situation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is more remaining to your glory, and more so in the world and in eternity to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen already said in some of his own monodies:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not heal bad illnesses, lest bad doctors be named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have divided this book into three parts.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter, ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and ironworks of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on suction and puncture, and on cupping-glasses, and on wounds, and on extracting splinters and like things, all organized and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on curing of hernias and like things; chapter organized from head to feet, and in the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauteries with fire and acute medicine, and on recalling the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	You should know the quality of the joints in that cautery and the defects of it, and in what condition it is forbidden to use a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the joints in the cautery and its defects is a long and prolix discourse, subtle by science, and secret and hidden; and many learned men have spoken about it, and they have disagreed among themselves, and I will only mention a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery conforms to all universal completeness, whether it is in material or non-material, except for two complete ones which are complete without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complete and dry material with no material, it will be desiccated; for some would say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others would say the opposite of it, that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the caustic and dry material be cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite of it would have you believe that by means of cautery, the joints are made healthy in all caustic and dry diseases that are found in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of a man to its humors with the completion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the sermon of that, that this experiment is already known to me at times to have discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But it is not necessary for it to come forth on this matter that has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter of cautery, and that you have known the diversity of the completeness of men and the disposition of diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents that happen to them, and the space of time that passes through these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other completenesses, there is no fear for you, and especially in cold and moist diseases, since all doctors have agreed on these, and are not discordant about the joints with cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness is that over cautery with medicine they are combined, for fire is simple, whose action does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized, nor does it harm another member connected to it except with a slight disadvantage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medicine combined reaches that member which is distant from it, and very easily brings difficult-to-cure disease into the sick member, and very easily causes harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this except in a superfluous way. Already we have known through experience and the long duration of service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not for the fact that it is hidden from your free book in this pause, I would reveal to you the secret hidden in fire, and the quality of the operation of it in bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, through a philosophical demonstration that would pierce your very soul.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that some do not agree on the time when it is best to perform a cautery and pause for the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at any time, because the harm caused by the accidental timing is submerged in the joint of what is attracted to the cautery, and more so if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, which are strong and fierce, and do not tolerate delay, for fear of those who come with malice, which is greater than a small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it is not considered in your souls, or sons, that this is not esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that disease which is cured by a cautery, there is no reduction of time, and pause at the consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not like that which they say by this, for a cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the completeness and dries out the humors which are the cause why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But a cautery is superfluous over medicine due to the desire for its utility and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that its disease will return at some hour of time, according to the completeness of the patient and the location of their disease, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it from the aggregation of superfluous things, and what has been brought to it through its acquisition of foods and similar causes; unless that disease in which a cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and humors, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in that case the pain will not return, but rather it will be reduced in size.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And besides, the common saying is that a cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not according to what I understand in this case, for I believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine or any other nearby cause through a cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and I understand that a cautery is the last resort of medicine only when we administer the methods of healing in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and apropos at the end of the cause, one administers a cautery, and it profits accordingly.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And I see here that a cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding which I understand from the common people and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of the cautery does not make a difference, as if it were absolutely true, for you have already proven and demonstrated that it does not do so except in some bodies, and the cautery with gold is good and better than one with iron, just as they say; but meanwhile, when you perform a cautery with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, because it is hidden according to the quantity you want for the roughness of the gold, and in order to prepare to receive cold; and if you add over it ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and case in the fire some plates so that the craftsman can see through the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, it is done to make a cautery with iron in such a way that we can approach the straightness of operation more lightly and more promptly.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those from head to foot, so that the demanding one may take what they want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On Caustics for Headaches due to Frigidity and Humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The First Chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This causticization confers upon the humidity and frigidity over the serving accident of which there are two causes, namely, the cause of soda and the multiplicity of raumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears that flow, and multiplicity of sleep, and toothaches and the throat, and universally all disease that comes through frigidity, just as paralytically, soddy, and apoplecticly, and similar in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this causticization is this: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine in the morning, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the patient and their age and habits demand.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then I command him to shave his head with a razor, and next to make him sit between his thighs on a well-cushioned bench and let him rest his thighs on the floor.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And next, pause the razor on your palm, right above the nostrils between your eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But meanwhile, since the said place of the middle is reached, mark that place with a tent, and next ignite the olive cautery in which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And next, place that on the marked place with a tent, in a way that it descends, by which your hand is slightly constrained little by little, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And next, raise your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see that some quantity of bone has been uncovered, just like the quantity of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to that iron, with another one, if it is refrigerated, until what I have said to you is visible.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And next, take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place, and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And next, apply to it a poultice wrapped in cloth and let it be on the place until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure the place with an ointment of four-fold medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that as long as the wound remains open, so much the better it gets, for it is more excellent and beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the cord should be cauterized inside the bone and held until some part of the specificity of the bone is melted.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And next, remove what has been fused to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery one should arrive at the last, until it presses strongly on the bone and the bone cracks, and this is the form of the small alfabet:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, the vapors of the head will escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, these two types of cauterization are not visible in their entirety, except in some men according to the way of fear; and I leave that to you, for it is better for health when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity, just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a fierce nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cauterization is more saved and better for me; and from that house and with that work, salvation comes.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On Caustics for the Head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head in a patient who is prolonged in their illness, and uses remedies such as wars, cochias, capipurgers, emplasters, poultices, cadels, and gualinas, and especially if the patient has already been cauterized with one cautery that does not benefit them at all, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in their nature; and if it is not fierce and finds a great cold, then that same head is cauterized with another cautery, leaving a little gap.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And next, cauterize it on the crown of his head with a cautery until the cord is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and uncover the quantity of bone which we have recounted, and cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head at the location called "vas", -- and that is the place where the wind pipe is situated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand away from there, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient by this will experience a great and different pain, unlike any other pains caused by all the other cauterizations of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will say this cautery in its place, because it is necessary to cauterize the crown of the head and the occiput with a more subtle cautery than that which is used for the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Third Chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Caustics for Migraines not Ancient.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain is mild in the head or spread out to the eye, and it does not respond to laxative medicines or other treatments that I have mentioned in the chapters on diseases; and nothing helps, then cauterization should be done in two ways: either with a sharp medicinal compound combined with an acute treatment, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But the cautery with medicinal compound is when you take a sweet almond, scrape it out and cut off the extremities of both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And next, incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blunt knife until it is made into a small hole, leaving the cord behind, so that it may be hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And next, strengthen the spot with a poultice applied by gentle compression, and let it be for three hours; and then remove the poultice and treat the almond, and leave the wound for two or three days, and next apply a poultice wrapped in cloth to the spot until it becomes solid.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some medicinal compounds which I have written about in the two treatises on medicinal compounds.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cautery with iron, according to this method: ignite by means of the cautery which has this form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	...and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a keyhole shape with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And next, place the iron on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the wire which is left behind is not melted - and rotate the small iron gradually with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of what is melted by the specificity of the cord is like most of it, and lift your hand so that the artery which is left behind is not melted, so that no blood flow comes.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And next, soak the poultice in salt water and place it on the location, and let it be for three days; and then remove the poultice wrapped in cloth, and cure with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize at the extremity of the sword-like shape according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this non-ancient type of migraine.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Caustics for Ancient Migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure an ancient migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the chapters on diseases, and the treatment does not help, and sometimes because of the disease it does not reach what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire; then it is necessary that you ignite the cutaneous cautery until it is white, since you signify on the location of the pain with a line of length which is most of it, or if it is not so; and put down your hand for one moment and strengthen it until you incise the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuity of the mandible, which is disturbed by mastication, and that the ligament is not melted and the nerves that are affected by this, and that there is no spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially to one who does not know what they are doing and is not skilled; and leave the operation at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find in this book a reminder of the regimen for the flow of blood that occurs by accident to the artery according to its own manner, in its own location.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle part of the head just as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on cutting with two cloaks, and it is better to cauterize this way and more conducive.
Capitol .v.	Fifth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On Caustics for Earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is cured by laxative causes and by other treatments which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one called "punctum", of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And next, make the puncture on the ignition and be directed to the entire ear, just like a wheel is revolved, or in the circumference of each sample if the pain is in any one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Draw out the cautery along the root of the ear little by little, until you have marked the location with a tent.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these dots is applied to the entire ear, and each one, then cure the locations until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On Caustics for Torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture which is cured and with cauterization is nothing but the species that comes through phlegm, according to what we have said in the chapters on diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that proceeds from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture with jarring and capipurgies and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not conform to it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteris: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little behind the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the contrary of the affected part, because softening only appears in the part that seems to be healing.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with a cautery in the right extremity of the ear, slightly above the crown of the head, and another one on the temple, the length of which is according to the length of the thumb's breadth, and put down your hand with the cautery until the quantity of most of the cord's specificity is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of sword-like shape, the form of which is before us.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however subtle it may be, that little bit you see is what you need to cut out the excessive grossness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure the location with water as before, until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On Caustics for Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with the water we have said, and your treatment does not conform to it, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteris: on all the horns of his head; and with a cautery in the middle part of the head, just as we have said; and with a cautery in the back.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And already it is cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and next, be cured with water as before.
Capitol .viii.	Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On Caustics for Oblivion caused by Phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	For it is necessary that the patient be given in the beginning great jars and pills of purging medicines.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And next, remove the head of the patient and place on the back of it an ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for a few moments, because that is the manner of the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to that method which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore, if it is cured thus; and not, then let there be made three cauteris in the back part of his head, which are descended from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the wound with water as it has proceeded.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to add more and the patient is water-tolerant, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you wish for greater addition, then cauterize it on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And cure that wound until it is healed; and be the cautery olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Ninth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On Caustics for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	For you should proceed in the softening of the head with jars and water as we have said; and then remove the head of the patient, and next cauterize it with a cautery on the middle part of the head, and another one on all the horns of the head, and another one on the back part of it, and three more on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body that there are many such cases and the patients are tolerant, then let there be made four cauteris on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually with a cautery until it is consumed by the cord's motive power, and lift up your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And cure that wound until it is healed, and this is an olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Tenth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On Caustics for Epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epilepsy, but that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is necessary to soften the brain at first with jars and with other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant except for medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer guarguarisms and mastigatories as purging medicines for several days with good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And next, remove the head of the patient, and next cauterize it with a cautery on the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and another one on the back of the head, and on each horn of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then let there be made those cauteris which I say, having paralyzed and softened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And be the cautery olive-shaped according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Eleventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Caustics for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thickened phlegm, then let there be made those cauteris which we have said in having paralyzed.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive descent into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then let there be given water that softens the brain according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And next, remove the head of the patient, and next make a tortoise shell in the shape of it on the circle, and then place that in the middle part of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated comfortably, and be held by all parties.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And next, apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of an ancient border of sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with tempered heat by measure, which is sufficient for the patient when they are in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And next, place that in the middle part of the head on the circle, and leave it until it is warmed through.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient for one week at a time, with another regimen of it good until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that with small points according to what is most suitable, so that you hold your hand with a cautery thus arranged: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And next, place that bundle wrapped in cloth or gray gauze.
Capitol .xii.	Twelfth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On Caustics for Water Descending into the Womb.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the womb by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that softens the head, and keep it away from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And place that in a bath of hot water for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And next, command that the patient's head be shaved, and cauterize it with a cautery on the middle part of the head; and next, cauterize it with two cauteris on both temples if there is the beginning of water in both wombs, or one latz if there is the beginning of water in one womb.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And cut all the veins and arteries which are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see flows of blood from it, stop the bleeding with some medicine which is to your ability.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the ablation of those and caution against flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the vertebrae left between two bones with two cauteries gradually produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Thirteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On Caustics for Ancient Tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the wombs are ancient and superfluous and by the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is excessive phlegmatic moisture, then let there be made those cauteris which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water descending into the wombs, and with a cautery in the middle part of the head and with two cauteris on the vertebrae between two temples, and with two cauteris on the vertebrae between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need addition, then let there be made a small cautery on the entire length of the coccyx bone over the extremity of the sacrum.
Capitol .xiiii.	Fourteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On Caustics for Stench from the Nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with water as we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare yourself and give to drink to the patient cockroaches for three nights; and next, remove the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a middle-shaped cautery and an olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And next, cauterize that with a clove-shaped cautery and two cauteries on the two sacral bones left under the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of cutting off the artery so as not to cut it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the clove-shaped cautery, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Fifteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Caustics for Softening of Eyelids in the Wombs.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the womb is softened by disease or humidity, then let there be made a cautery on that eyelid with a lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you wish, cauterize that on the two sacral bones a little with two cauteries in all parts, and be extended to the temporal regions.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sacral bone.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is accustomed.
Capitol .xvi.	Sixteenth Chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Caustics for the Eyelid of the Womb when the hairs are transformed into inner parts and the womb is clenched.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the womb are transformed into inner parts and clenched like that, then cauterize them according to two manners: either with fire or with medicine concurring.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with fire of that kind, command the patient to sit before you and let them comb their hair as those who make it smooth, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if clenched that, then you should strengthen the wombs of that with a band so that there is no harm until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, then pause the patient's head in your seat, and next, inscribe on the eyelid of the womb with a tenta, with a sign which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And next, place that bundle wrapped in alum or mucilage of papyrus on the womb.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And next, ignite the cautery which is in this form:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And next, cauterize on the figure which is inscribed, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the cord which is like a leaf of myrtle, appears properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health for this work is that you see the eyelid of the womb already contracted and the hairs of it raised above the puncture of the womb.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift up your hand and leave that for three days, and next, place on top of it a cloth wrapping until the scar is elevated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if some cause returns for the hairs to their original state and the eyelid is softened, then let there be made another time the cautery on that just as you did previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are in the eyelid left behind, then let there be made a cautery on that until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the hairs do not trouble the womb.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with concurring medicine is that you command the patient to comb their hair until it is prolonged and equalized, and next, make a cloth wrapping in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And next, take one ounce of known soap and live cause vinegar. End of the text. And thus, and next, mix those causes well, and make it with a festination so that it is not warmed up; and next, spread this water over the cloth which is made in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, and place that on one womb or both; and leave the womb bundle wrapped in alum, and the patient's head be in your seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And pause the said on the medicine and press that a little and not harm it until the patient feels the effect of the medicine, for the effect is in it like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus, when you perceive that the patient has experienced the effect, then let them take the medicine and make it with your said; and thus, when the effect ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the womb with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as it was washed with fire or with incision, for you are well; and if not, return to that of the medicine on the location where the medicine has not been applied and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and the womb is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And next, place on top of it a cloth wrapping until the scar of adjustment is eradicated, and next, cure that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to diligently watch over your operation so that in the womb there does not fall out any residue of medicine; and if the eyelid, after some days, becomes softened and some cause of hairs troubles the womb, then let there be made another time the medicine on that location which has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and next, envelop it so that it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the leaf of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the wombs of men are diversified according to their greatness and smallness, and therefore according to this is made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the way of rectitude from that to which it is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Seventeenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On Caustics for Fistula that is in the Lacrimal of the Womb.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with the water that we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer your cure, then let it be that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place their head on your lap, and hold the head of him some minister between your knees in such a way that it is not harmed nor agitated with his own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And next, place a bundle wrapped in alum or mucilage of papyrus on the womb of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And next, ignite the cautery which is in this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is concave, like the shape of a reed or a quill of vulture, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you will, let it be as a tent.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But in any case, the one that is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And next, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it up.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then work on it and extract the tumor from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And next, place the cautery on it which is well ignited, and take with your hand a little of the cautery from the head to the nose part, so that you do not err or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray parts of the head and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus, if at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, then let there be made another or two times if necessary; and leave that as is for three days, and next, place on top of it a cloth wrapping and surround it with an exsicative ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has been 11 days and it is not healed, then let there be made a sharp corrosive medicine on top of it until the bone is exposed and is scraped according to what is written in your capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first doctors also said: take the location of the fistula and fill it with that and place in that fine fissure which is its shape, and pour into it one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with a fine grip and good retention, so that the patient is not harmed because the melted lead does not reach the womb of him; and let there be placed on the patient's head a bundle wrapped in alum or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the water that we have said about cauterizing and curing, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a thrust of the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Eighteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On Caustics for Wounds of the Pots.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times accidental fissures occur on the lips, and most often on the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the water that we have said in the divisions and your cure does not take hold, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is seen:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And be the concavity of it according to the subtlety of a cuttlefish.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Next, place that cautery so carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that with cerotes until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Nineteenth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On Caustics for Fistulas in the Mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an apostema forms and bursts, and is antique, and flows forth and makes a fistula, and you cure that and your cure does not take hold, then let it be that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and next put that ignited thing into the hole of the fistula, and with your hand until it reaches the bottom of it, and finally do this once or twice; and next, cure that with water as we have said about curing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus, if the pus is abscessed and healed, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the location and expose the corrupted bone according to what will come in its own capital.
Capitol .xx.	Twentieth Chapter.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On Caustics for Teeth and Softening of the Gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you cure those with medicines and do not succeed, then place the patient's head on your lap, and next ignite the cautery in the shape of which will come to this, so that you place the cauterized area over the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery hastily, and with your hand a little, until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And next, lift up your hand, and next repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And next, have the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, and then spit it out, because the damaged tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Twenty-First Chapter.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On Caustics for Toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness, or it is warm or worm-like, or your cure with medicine does not take hold, then let there be made a cautery in that according to two manners: either the cautery of oxen's fat, or the cautery by fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The cautery of oxen's fat is when you take the fat of oxen and boil it in a cauldron with iron, and next, take a bundle and wrap it around the tip of the tent, and next, immerse that fat-boiled bundle and place it on the painful tooth hastily until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And next, repeat that several times until the virtue of fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse wool or a cloth in the fat mentioned above, and place that on the painful tooth, and then place over it hot iron until the iron reaches the bottom of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But in any case, the cautery by fire is when you attend to the ember or iron glow, and it should be in the core of it some roughness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And next, ignite the cautery in the shape that will come, and place it on the tooth and with your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain is reduced or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that by the effect of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good fat and holds it for one hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize in whatever way you wish, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the Caustic.
Capitol .xxii.	Twenty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Caustics for Hernias.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are of flesh and cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to induce digestion in those mildly, then let there be ignited the cautery concave with this form, having two extremities humps so that the smoke from the cautery flows through the other extremity, and place that ignited thing over the apostema once, and another if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then let there be placed the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and next leave it for three days and place over it a cloth wrapping in fat so that what the fire has burned up is reduced.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that with ointments and tents and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the Caustic or cautery for this is to convey.
Capitol .xxiii.	Twenty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Caustics for Quinsy of the Throat and Constriction of the Neck.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come out on the surface of the lung, and most especially when this is due to coldness of congestion, then let it be that the patient is evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and next cauterize that at the root of the gullet in the affected location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And take care not to let the cautery reach the throat or burn the lining of it, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And next, cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be sharp like a chisel according to the preceding manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that with water as preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Caustics for Disease of the Lung and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and disease of the lung are due to cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or chills, and is an old disease, then let there be made two cauteries on the furcula at the affected locations, one above and one below; and another cautery in the middle location of the foot between the two mamillae; and let the cautery be sharp like a chisel according to the preceding form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be punctate with the cauteries that are called puncture, according to the form which precedes in the piercing of earaches.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be punctures until they come out to those places; and next, cure that with water as preceded until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now let the cauteries have three ramps where cauterization is done with this: in one instance, you can do three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On Caustics for Titillating which is the Head of the Helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not remain in place during its return movement, as it is accustomed to returning to its original position, and then for a small movement it becomes dislocated so that it seems to be, as we have testified, then let there be made a primary reduction of the dislocation, and next, let the patient be reversed over their own back or on the right side; and next, lift up the membrane which is in the lower part of the citillic above, with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated downwards.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And next, ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And next, cauterize the membrane until it penetrates into the other side; and then the figure of cauterization will be like this: with four heads of cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and thus those subtle ones according to the quantity of tent; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some times it is adjusted according to this count, and that's why there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And next, place over the cautery pure salt, and next, cause the patient to adhere to tranquility, and let the member not be damaged for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and that is done, then let there be made a cautery on the muscle with sharp or punctate cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Caustics for the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humors come into the stomach until that excess is expelled from its congestion and are multiplied in it, and if you continue with the methods of curing and do not succeed, then let there be placed over the patient's back, and stretch out their arms and legs, and next cauterize that with three cauteries: one on the foot for the quantity of a finger with a sharp cautery, and two on both sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangle-shaped cautery is formed; and lengthen between them so that they are not adjusted to make a pressure.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery reaches two-thirds of the thickness of the membrane.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, plus addition, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and that is one cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized punctate according to that which is feared from this cautery: and it is when you sense on the stomach point by point, as much as you wish with a tent, and next cauterize those points with a cautery; and next, cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On Caustics for the Fretful Foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain develops in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive sweating, and it is not cured with water as we have said, then let there be placed over the patient's back three cauteries according to this form and this quantity mixed on the foot left of the hipbones, where the position of a lying person.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be in the shape of a right cross.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your hand on the moving cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is added is equal to the thickness of the membrane of the codena, and not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their legs extended and their arms raised.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a sharp cutting cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care not to process too much in the cauterization, and let the subtlety of all the membrane be mixed so that it is mixed throughout the whole body and reaches into the vessels, for this membrane here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On Piercing of Apostema of the Foot with a Cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excrescence or apostema on the foot and you want to know if that apostema is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of it, then let it be that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient's gravity and pain will be increased.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then great pain is sharpened and at times it tires out even the doctors' cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, let the patient be turned over onto their back; and next, sense the location of the apostema with a tent; and next, ignite the cautery which is similar to rag, according to the form that has preceded on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire membrane is burned, until it reaches the skin, and until a healthy pus forms.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that with the cures of other apostemas until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not fitting to use this form of cauterization unless one has studied and prolonged their learning in the art of medicine, and has known many diseases; but this one may be bold on occasion with this operation, yet nonetheless let us leave that to others, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Caustics for Pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient ones have said that the cauteries of Aristology are to be applied to pleurisy in a cold and dry manner, according to this method, which is taken from the roots of Aristology, one long and dry root is found, and it is as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And next, immerse that in oil and ignite it at the fire, and next, let there be a cautery on that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one slightly declining towards the side below the beard, and with two cauteries in that part which declines between the fifth rib and the navel, declining a little towards the rear parts; and another on the middle location of the foot; and another above the stomach; and three cauteries from behind; and one cautery on that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not fitting to compress your hand on the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the membrane at work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient ones have said that certain men who used a cautery of iron like a ray and ignited it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs, until it reaches that apostema and purulent matter is formed, just as we have said in the apostema of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this piercing with a cautery, there is no fear, for so many times it happens in that place where the fistula forms and there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Thirtieth Chapter.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On Caustics for Melaena.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of melaena with water as we have said in the division, and your cure does not succeed, then let there be made a cautery in that place according to three methods, all of which are right-angled, one of which is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the melaena, following the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the thickness between each cautery be as thick as a finger or slightly more, and the method of the cautery be the same method which we have said in the cauteries of the foot, namely.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand on the cautery; and let the patient lie down on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery with two sparks, which cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the membrane which is in the end part of the melaena, where the patient's left side lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be with which you lift up the membrane according to the length of the body, so that the cauteries are made according to the latitude of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And next, insert the two sparks, ignite one, in that place where with those you will penetrate the membrane from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And next, extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three sparks.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And next, cure the cautery so that it remains laid out for several days, for it is more certain than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Thirty-First Chapter.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Caustics for Hydrophobia.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not taken in hydrophobia, but rather in acute properness.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrophobia with the methods of curing which we have said in the division and your cure does not succeed, then let there be made a cautery with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel, and one cautery above the stomach, and another cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the melaena, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery above the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportional to the subtlety of the membrane.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And next, leave the cautery uncovered so that it may remain laid out for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of cure next to the cautery with water as is needed, so that two intentions are added to it, and thus it is hastened to heal with the aid of assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is sharp, according to the form that has preceded above, and it is this one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped, according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Thirty-Second Chapter.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On Caustics for the Feet and Legs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostemated in hydrophobia and filled with stagnant water, then let there be made a cautery on the feet above the knee joint, but not too much water, and lift up your hand with the cautery and do not turn it; and next, lift up your hand and do not return to it, for the stagnant water resists.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the form of the cautery: And next, make two cauteries on both legs, and in each leg, let there be made a cautery at the extremity with a sharp cutting cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be according to the length of the leg: one on the upper part and the other below the middle location of the leg; and two cauteries on each leg.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open without cure for a long time, so that some water may drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And next, cure with those causes which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Thirty-Third Chapter.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On Caustics for the Abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is troubled by cold and humidity, causing the virtues of digestion and retention to be debilitated in the stomach and intestines, and it is not cured with the methods of cure and does not succeed, and sometimes the patient suffers a caustic display of virtue, then let there be made a cautery on that place with a large cautery above the stomach, according to what has preceded in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, with the circle cautery and four small cauteries in the circuit of the navel, with a sharp cutting cautery; and with a cautery on the flank, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humors are exuberant and the patient can tolerate it, then let there be made a cautery on that place above the navel and above the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for this is perfect cure of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On Caustics for Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there are old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that is cold and damp or corrupted humors, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division and do not succeed with your cure, then let there be made three cauteries on the pus left behind at the lower part of the small triangle-shaped vertebrae, and a cautery above the navel that falls between two bones.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that the stomach of that person is chilled and the food of that person is not digested, and the face of that person is often apostemated, then let there be made a cautery on that place above the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded; and one cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the melaena of that person with a sharp cutting cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and next cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On Caustics for Atheria, Properly Speaking, the Abscess of Which Should be Drained.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you drain an abscess, then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Next, insert that ignited thing into the abscess that has been drained, and finally lift up your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make it once or twice, for if the abscesses are many, then let there be made a cautery on each of them according to what we have recounted, and next cure those with water that agrees with their conformation until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on someone, it is more likely to be beneficial.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On Caustics for Fistulas That Are Formed in the Natural Parts of the Body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, let it be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the natural parts of the body that is old and corroded, filled with pus and corrupted humors, and thus it is more worthy to cure it with a subtle tent, and next know the quantity of the depth of it with the previously mentioned tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Next, ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And next, put that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity of how far in the tent has gone.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery on that place until those corrupted bodies are thoroughly burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And take care not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestines, then take care of all those places; and do not make it so unless the fistula is in a fleshy location that is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the matters are drained from it, and remains so for a long time, then know that it has been fully cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the front of it, where corruption occurs, or flows out from those causes whose memory will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On Caustics for the Tonsils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the tonsils there is pain due to cold or excessive ventilation, and by this the patient's throat is exhausted, then it is necessary that a cautery be made on each tonsil with a sharp cutting cautery of which the memory precedes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cuterize with a second small one, so that three lined cauteries will come forth, and thus they will be more beneficial.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On Caustics for the Bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and softening in the bladder due to cold and dampness such that the patient cannot retain urine, then let there be made a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the hair begins at the navel, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of knots in the bone; and cauterize that place with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let it be a sharp cutting cautery according to what has been processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On Caustics for the Womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and dampness in the womb, and by this conception is prevented, and the menses are corrupted, and the prompting of them is delayed, and it occurs that pain comes from the hinder part of them, then let the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, just as we have said in the chapter on the bladder; and one cautery on the lower part of the back, or two, and let the cautery be sharp cutting.
Capitol .xl.	Fortieth Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On Caustics for Dislocation of the Hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When dampness and moisture are overflowing in the part of the hip, and causes of inflammation are formed in that place, and the sign of it is that the leg is prolonged over the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found in the part where the thigh meets the body.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then let it be necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the hip with a circular cautery similar to a ring, as you have marked with a tent in the circuit of that part just as it is revolved, and so that the part falls in the middle location of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be of the same form as the one that preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then let it be necessary to make three cauteries with a large olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the subtlety of the entire membrane; and next, cure that place until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Forty-First Chapter.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On Caustics for the Sciatic Vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the part of the hip and its cause is cold and dampness, the patient is cured with water as we have said, but it does not succeed, and this is old-fashioned, then let it be necessary that you purify the patient's gross humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and next, cauterize that place.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And next, follow two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize that place on the part of the flank with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make good depth in them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of the said one, whether it is an olive-shaped or a large one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes make the cautery on the middle location above the head of the hip, so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, so that it be a containing circle and burn the subtlety of the entire membrane.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is attached to the hip and not extended into the joint.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended into the joint, then let there be made two cauteries on the joint over the location where the patient feels the pain that is the source of the suffering; and one cautery on the femur for four digits a little above the hip.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is sharp-cutting, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the subtlety of the membrane.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain is extended to the location near the tips of the toes, then let there be made a cautery here where they complain with a cautery for three points or four or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains that there is pain left behind from the donor's back to the joint, then let there be made a cautery here with one sharp-cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And take care in all cautery that you do not leave the cautery to burn nerves or large arteries, and that because of this it will be harmful to your patient with bad consequences.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one and another of those which you will cauterize on the femur and finally in the cauterization, and the inflamed hot focus inside until the tumor reaches the end, and the fire perforates and corrupts all the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And next, a violent solution of the belly, and thus death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And thus the wise men say in the cauterization of the hip: make it similar to a ring of iron, the circuit of which is half a palm; and let it be as deep as the orifice of a date pit or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that ring is another third one; and let the space between them be the quantity of the knots in the bone; and let those rings cover two parts; and let their length be one knot or two knots, and make in those margins an iron frame decently dressed around the rings; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And next, be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and gives sparks, and next, be placed on the part of the hip, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that place with three circular cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And next, leave that place for three days; and next, apply a poultice to it with border and leave the wound open for many days; and next, cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Thus says Albucasis: "Oh, sons, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of observing it, and therefore few have found those who observe over it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But from the best cauteries to him who suffered them, and finds that place of his.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But the cautery with medicines that adheres is what you should make two circles having an armpit perforated in which the handle of the iron gate will be; and let the length of the wall in the middle of its being two knots or as many as those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is the quantity of the thickness of the said one; and let them be above and below, and let them contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And next, place it on the part of the hip where the patient is lying on their side, and compress your hand on the part of the hip; and next, take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be like small fire gradually, and keep that for an hour, and let the patient suffer the mordication and adjustment until the mordication ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And next, lift your hand with the instrument and wash away the hot water from all of the hip with lukewarm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And next, leave that place for three days and apply a border to it until the blackness of the adjustment is restored, and leave it so for some days, and then the patient will be purified; this is the final remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that place with medicines until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the joint or the femur, make it so that it contains water according to how it is made in the hip similarly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and you have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkali and of unextinguished cause, one part from each hip, and mix them together and pause in a new cauldron of which the remaining part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause the bottom of one cauldron in another cauldron, and pour over that alkali and living cause with lukewarm water which absorbs them for one finger's breadth, and then compress them with your own hand for good compression, and leave the cauldron to descend from it hot water into the remaining part of the cauldron.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And next, adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkali, renewed ones, because that water is of strong fiery quality, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cauterization of other members, for this operation is of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are mixed with others which are used for cauterization of the hip, such as tithymal and myrrh and alkali and powdered coral, so that they may be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recounts the story of a man from ancient times who performed an operation and cure for pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and magnified how great it was to have achieved that, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed once and for all just as he had recommended, because very few people understand that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that he should be pressed with certain green herbs, and if not found to be green, a fresh fig should be taken; and much should be mixed with a little gray and placed on the hip where the pain is, or in the joint, or in the femur, and tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient can endure the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And next, take it and put it in water, and then when the body of him is refreshed, put that in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medicines unless there is a proper evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But already Soranus says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized through a goat's wound, it will be beneficial to him; and let the cautery be made according to this method: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And next, take dried goat's skin and soak it in smoke through fire until it becomes carbonized; and let it be placed on the wool and left until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And next, iterate this, and do not cease doing this until the sensation of the mordication reaches the hip and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the "cauterization of goats".
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	At times pain is in both places due to multiple causes, such as by bruising or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes, by the infusion of moist and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And let the cautery be made in this single species which is caused by the effusion of moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with bitter pills and similar ones that are made on both places where the pain is, three lines according to the latitude of the patient, plus or minus one cauterization or more, depending on the quantity that is seen as tolerable by the patient and its virtue.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let it be made a cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries in the middle of the hip according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the Cauterization at the Commencement of Gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this illness attacks small children; and the sign of its commencement in children is that it occurs on their stretching or straining, and the elevation and movement of their elbow.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And then you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and the knots of the patient that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that place with a cautery that is a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery on all sides of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize in the circle of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let there be proper points between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And next, cure the place until it is healed with this method that we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be aware that cautery should not be administered in gout caused by a spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the Cauterization of Gout and Pain in Joints.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When pains in the joints are caused by humid humors that are enclosed in each member of the body, then when pains come on the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this condition properly "podagra".
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by humid humors is cured by a method of cure and the pains are not restored, then let those pains be removed by cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And that you should cauterize it properly with evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot, using many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, the form of which is as follows:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if necessary, make points on the fascia of the foot, then use a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the knuckles or other joints, and many times it happens, then let it be cauterized on each knuckle with three or four cauteries of all parts, using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are necessary, then let it be cauterized and do not apply too much pressure with your hand on the cautery before, just so that you touch the subtlety of the membrane.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the knuckle and hip, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the most part of it and is called "suagra", then prick on the circle of the fibers as they turn, pricking two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remains pain in the said places, then prick on the circle of the fibers over each knot and over the crease of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise to the joints or muscles in a few days, then let it be cauterized on all parts of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if there is made a good regimen and flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healed, may God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the Cauterization of Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a wound occurs in the groin and says that it is swollen before the navel, and this is where it begins to approach, then it is necessary for you to tell the patient to leave his diet alone on that day and to use gentle remedies so that the wound may come out of the belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And next, follow the patient with your hands on his back over his hip, and command him to keep his arm straight until the opening is made or the skin appears or the navel shows.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And next, return to that place with the said lines and signal a rupture over the bone of the pelvis with a sign similar to the middle of a circle on the divided parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And next, ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes moderately red and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And next, reduce the navel or the skin to its natural shape, and next place your hand on the spot so that the navel does not shrink.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already put between the joints of the patient and left one joint, another serving on his thighs, and another on his feet, which has its own hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And next, place the cautery on that sign with your hand holding the cautery straight, and on that, until you reach the bone of the pelvis to the middle of the duodenum; and repeat it in another way if you have not achieved it in the first way into the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the sign of the navel at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that navel for fear that on the patient it may bring death or great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you apply the cautery do not touch the bone, nor confirm your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their great and small size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And next, cure the place of the cautery for three days with a border until the scar of fire is restored.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that place with other remedies until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lies on his back for 40 days until the wound and the sore are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary that you provide the patient with nourishment according to the length of time of their cure, which stretches their belly, and that the navel does not shrink outside of the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And next, when you wish to take away after 40 days, then administer it decently done, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it is diminished by labor and replenishment of food and drink, and of loud voices, for when one uses this regimen of entire healing, it will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you will say the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you wish not to be neglected, then cauterize the rupture with this cautery round about according to its quantity, and let it be that which is exhaled from the membrane as if it were the third part of it; and next, cure that place with what we have said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some first ones have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, plus the sign in it:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and a paused line that goes along the latitude in the side above the rupture, and another line above it; and then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When a wound occurs in some members due to bruising or percussion and the pain persists for a long time and does not submit to cure with medicines, then it is necessary that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be of the entire member according to its greatness and smallness, virtue and debility, location of twist and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary with those pains that they are punctured of member to that member which approaches it, in order that you may achieve those with a cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers are sometimes cured with a cautery by great divine intervention, and especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of humors and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that patient, consider if the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor stayed, and fear for the patient that corruption will comprehend all his body and all its complexity, then cauterize it over the head with eight cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another behind the forehead; on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little bit into the bone to make a small impression, and from there displace the scabs, so that the exhalation of great vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the mouth according to what has been prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already spread out on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and also cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both nostrils, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each armpit, and two on each elbow, and two on each knee, and one on each ankle, and two on the tendons of each foot; and cauterize it on all the joints of the said arms and legs, and on each heel of the feet, and on the fibers of the thighs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard yourself from the nerves that are over the sole, lest you burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the hip.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more they are beneficial and confirmative; and know that the patient has no pain in the cautery, just like they do with others, because the body of him is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be great or small according to the members and joints, as directed by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure the cautery with flour of errors mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is stupified or drowsy and is cured with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that stupified member with cauteries according to its greatness or smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery go into the thickness of the membrane a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure it with a gentle remedy until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which occurs in the arms and legs, and on the vertebrae of the back, and the sensation of the nerves which move that member is restored, and the stupor is restored.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless you are wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of Whites that are Morphia.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When whites are ancient and do not submit to any of the remedies of medicine, then you should cauterize on that with a pre-owned cautery for a little bit according to the quantity of the membrane's specificity until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and the color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure it with flour of errors and lentils mixed with red oil and leaves of arnoglossa, and with dove's blood or with raven's blood, each part is one quarter and all are mixed, and next, wrap a cloth around the place and put it on until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of Cramp.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cramps begin and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circle of it as it turns.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not seen this way, because I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to be cauterized in the circle of it with a circle as we have said, or with many cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Adulteration.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adulteration is delayed in its maturation, and it so happens that this is due to superfluity causing it, or the state of the patient, which is old in decrepitude, with little blood, or by time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of adulteration; then cauterize in the circle of it with many small punctate cauteries; and next, release that which will fasten in its maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you wish to perforate it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle location of the adulteration until it penetrates the membrane.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that location which is farther away, because the body of the arm is alleviated; and next, cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is corruption wandering in the member, which corrodes it as if consuming dry wood with fire.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosion in a place where it can withstand the cautery with fire, then ignite the pointed cauteries, many small ones, and great ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And next, cauterize it completely on all sides until you eradicate all corruption and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And next, release it for three days, and pause on the cauterized spots with a cloth sprinkled with oil mixed until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And next, cure it with flesh-producing remedies.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is medicated with some repeated applications of acute medicine, because that is a remedy for a place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, cautery with fire is of greater divine assistance.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I already said the cure for it with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you will need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Warts and other Similar Things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times it happens that there is a disease in the leftover parts of the foot which is called a wart, and it is a great, hidden cause which weighs down the foot; and cauterization on those is done in two ways, either with fire or with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cautery with fire is when you ignite the concealed cauteri resembling a wheel of punishment, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the wart on all sides, and it has subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And next, pause that which is ignited on the wart, and next, move your hand with the cautery in the circle of the wart until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wart.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And next, release that for three days until the wart begins to fall off.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And next, apply that with wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on for one night, because it will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And next, cure that place with flesh-producing remedies until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and many times it happens in the surface of the body, mainly on the arms and legs, then it is necessary that you administer to those cauteries with water; and this is done by taking a hollow reed or iron rod or wheel of punishment, and placing it on the wart; next, put a small amount of hot water into the hollow reed, and hold your hand, and move that with compression of your hand all over, and press the edge of the reed onto the root of the wart, and allow the hot water to flow through the preon of the root of the wart; and wait for the patient a little while the stinging of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, because the wart with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do with those, and then proceed to the other until you come upon all of them in their place on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And next, cure those with flesh-producing remedies which are the roots of the warts being eradicated.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the Cauterization of Tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a tremor occurs due to constriction of the nerves or fever caused by constriction, or for another similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also on the feet, and on the stomach, with an olive oil cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of it subsides and hastens the recovery of the constriction-caused illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Whites in the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are accidental whites which are pustules that tear open and are formed from gross corrupt matter; therefore, it is necessary at first to appear as if so, that is, to be cauterized on the entire head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made from mirt wood, the tip of which has been extended by fire; or with a long, curved cautery; or with a lentecular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and do not believe, for it is disrupted by those excesses, and is cured from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however, it is necessary that this be done appropriately with evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the Cauterization of Accidental Bleeding from an Incision by Archer's Tool.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many times there occurs bleeding from an incision by Archer's tool, which is caused by the wound that follows, or by the incision of apostemes or cauteries on a member, and similar things, and it is difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when bleeding occurs as above, then you should take a cloth with your hand to the place of the Archer's tool, and apply it to that spot, strengthening it many times until the bleeding stops and does not recur.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And next, pause the olive oil cauteries, both small and great, in number, and breathe upon them until they are thoroughly ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And next, take from those one small or one great according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein, hastening more than you have stopped the bleeding with your said remedy, and apply the cautery until it is cauterized and restrained that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you stop the said remedy and withdraw the cautery, then take another cautery, carefully prepared among those which are ready in the fire, and do not cease to do this until the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And take care that you do not burn the nerves which are here, and that other evils come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, then it is not possible in those to restrain the bleeding, and especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four ways: or with a cautery as we have said before, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted, the extremities of it are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or that it be tied with a thread or with ligament by strong constriction, or that medicines be applied to it which have the virtue of restraining the bleeding; and they should be strengthened with poultices and constriction decent.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers restraint by means of ligament and constriction with cloths or by position of constrictive causes and similar things does not cure until late.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this occurs in some way and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then act with pause of the said indication on the orifice of that vein just as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of it until the bleeding stops from the upper part of the wound, and on the Archer's tool let it not be reformed; and above the Archer's tool, sprinkle water cold of great freshness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and further consider what cautery or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On Incision, Perforation, Ventoses, and Phlebotomy, and Wounds and their Similar Things.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illnesses in which cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine concomitant, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for those with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters on the subordination of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that it may be understood by him who seeks this, and thus on what he has asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, it is necessary, son, that you learn that in this chapter, it is for fear of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore it is necessary, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times evacuation occurs, which is with blood, and to which life is bound, that there be great caution, for the sprinkling of the vein or incision on an apostema or warning of exsistura or purgation of the wound or extraction of a sagetum or incision of a peyra, and their similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all those is accompanied fear and trembling, and in most of them death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not befall you, for sometimes the case is that you must use the ways of men with many manners of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from among them are some that flee with their own illness and it is light for them to die, and thus because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from among them is one that gives you his own breath and speech, you expecting health with him, and his own illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not necessary that you consent to what comes to you from which this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and rapacity; and do not presume any cause on that except for aprop certain science which verifies that coming to you, and through which the praise of success will come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that which is converted into health, for in that is help to you on acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God in you inspires His understanding and does not withhold from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinct by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be alleviated for you that which you ask about this and that of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Chapter I.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the Cure of Water which is contained in the Head of Children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs in children at the time of birth, and when the midwife strengthens the child's head with her hands.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have never seen this illness except in children; and all those whom I have seen died from it, and therefore it is my duty to write about it.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head was always magnificently swelled to the point where it could not contain itself anymore due to the greatness of its own head, and more so than the humidity increased until mortal fire.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the vertebrae and the bone, or added behind the bone over the cranium.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Therefore, the operation in that case is to make an incision on the mid-point of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be about two inches so that the humidity flows through it, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is more augmented and the apostema is greater, then two incisions are made in that manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is behind the bone, the sign of it is that you should push open the commissures of the head from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress it with your hand at the parts inside, and there will be no harm to you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you make an incision on the mid-point of the head with three fissures in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And properly apply the incision to extract all the humidity; and properly strengthen the fissures with cloths and poultices; and properly immerse it in hot water and oil on the fifth day, and properly loosen the ligament and cure the wound with tentatives and applications, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision, which takes into account the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or in the right side, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the apostema appears and the accumulation of water, and do so as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery, and beware of bleeding from it, for if you do, the patient will die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the Incision of the Arteries which are near the Ears, called Hilaseuses.
Capitol segon.	Chapter III.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When old men have cataracts or wounds in their eyes or feet, and it is long-standing, and you do not rely on medicine for its cure, then the last resort in this case is to make an incision on those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those which the patient's head is affected, and properly freshen the location with an asperous cloth so that the arteries appear, and properly strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly consider where the vein is pulsing; and the places of each one on top of the places which are near the ears are depressed, and so much so that they only show in certain men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And properly sign on the artery with a tentative touch, and properly incise each one with the spatula of each part above the incision, which goes through to the bone, and this is so in the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the points of the incision on the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two digits adjusted, for when some vein is incised the blood flows out with a pulsatile egress, which jumps forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three digits, and properly sign with a tentative touch, and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what flows out in blood should be about one ounce. and it flows out little by little, more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and of the accumulation of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And properly consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone some cause of the cranium, then incise it thus so that no apostema is caused.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And properly strengthen the wound with poultices and ligatures of linen cloth, and properly cure it with applications until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the Extraction of the Arteries which are in the Temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When some ancient or long-standing emigration occurs in the temples, due to humidities and qualities of the lacertae, or an old and vehement inflammation similar to those, and it is medicated by the manners of cure of medicine, but this does not suffice, then we have recourse to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that the patient reveals the skin on which they are located in the temples; and understand to see the artery appearing in the temple, which is shown to you by its pulsation, and is hidden except in a few men due to vehemence of heat.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and properly freshen the location with an asperous cloth or evaporate the location with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then take the spatula and cut the vertebra with it in such a way that you reach the artery; and properly get to the point where you extract that from the upper parts until you extract it from the vertebra and uncover those tunics which are beneath it, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it with the extremity of the onychium, and properly incise one part according to the quantity by which the extremities are prolonged and contracted, and there will be no bleeding flow, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And properly evacuate one ounce of blood. to three ounces.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you divide it into two parts with a faithful double fold of cedema or with cords to length, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and the bleeding flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And properly incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do this in that hour or almost another.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizer into the bone and with a cauterizer cutlar until the extremities are incised, and remain in that place of this mixed work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is a better work if the patient has fever or is of scorched complexion; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to dry up the humidity, and therefore it is better in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to properly extract the arteries which fill the place of old cotton, and be paused over the powder decently made, and be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh appear and with some application until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time bleeding occurs from the artery, then you should apply yourself to restrain that blood, or with a cauterizer, or what fills the place of cotton, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present to you, then pause your hand over the place until the blood is congealed, and apply the place with hot water of vehement temperature so that the sharpness repose, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two coats, since you have marked the two places with a tentative touch, and then each one, almost in silence, comes to the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities is elongated, for they are not consolidated entirely by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterizer:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	and the sharpness of the two coats is exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But however, if the sharpness is less than two coats, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two coats near each other, and do not cut through the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness, it is held to be a burning of the focus in those and the flesh is removed gradually.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between two coats is the quantity of the thickness of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the Cure of Eyes with Sharp and Acid Tears.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acid tears and the eyes of those veins which are above the forehead of the head protrude, and no medicine brings relief in this case, and the face of the patient becomes red and feels like a wandering procession like ants, and the eyes of that person are exhausted, humidified to such an extent that their eyelids are constricted, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears; those who practiced medicine in ancient times mixed up this cure with a poultice for this operation, and called it "spassa".
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to pluck out the hairs which are on his forehead, and properly incise three openings equally distant from each other according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the lacertae which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of incising the arteries which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge well-applied or dry cloths with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then take the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise the entire cord that is between two incisions on the cranium which is above the bone, and properly do this by the incision migrating into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And properly stretch the spatula and insert into the first incision another time with a cutlar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the blade of that cutlar so that it cuts through the flesh attached to the cord, and the blade of it is sharp enough to penetrate into the bone, and push it into that until it reaches the migratory incision, and remove with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and properly do this in the migratory incision into another incision.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since a quantity of blood flows out, express the places where the clots of blood have formed.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And properly pause in each incision a cloth of old cotton, and pause over those powders mixed with wine, oil, and vinegar, and apply that which does not cause putrid apostema.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a great application of hot water or tea, and properly cure with applications of balsam, rose oil, and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the Cure of Lachrymose Tears by Cauterization and Application to the Eyes Descending from the Parts Behind the Head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When certain veins of cauterization are sharp and continuous, and the patient's eyes are exhausted small, and their regard for them is weakened, and the eyelids ulcerated and shedding their hairs, and in the forehead of the head there is a sharp pain leading to subsequent exhaustion, then it becomes clear through these accidents that the matters and cauterizations come from many veins of the parts behind proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in these cases is this: that you command the patient to uncover his forehead, and properly incise a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little bit for latitude (and start with the incision of the left temple into the right temple; and be incised into the bone; and extend your hand from the lacertae of the temples which are opposite the mastoid process), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and properly fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton or cloths that are used to bind.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And properly apply above the powders mixed with wine and oil in order that there may not be putrid apostema.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the apostema is diminished, then it is necessary to apply heat to the bone until it begins to appear flesh; and properly cure with an exsicative regimen which will make the flesh appear, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony mixture, and make a poultice out of it, and administer it to these wounds in the natural course of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the Cure of That Which Catarrhizes in the Ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The whole cause that catarrhizes in the ears is one of four species, because it is either mineral pyrrhea or a similar cause like iron and copper, or it comes from plants like cypress or fava, or it is a fluidal cause like water and wine mixed with their similarities, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when pyrrhea catarrhizes in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the ear, and pause the ear at the sun, and if it times the pyrrhea, then it is necessary to distill into that some cause of violet oil or saffron, and properly administer the extraction from there, and make the stornutation according to conditions, and stop the nose before the event of stornutation.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And properly pause in the canal of the ear with some cloths of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above, because many times it is forgotten due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gotten, then you should administer an extraction of the ear with the instrument called epicyclic gestures, subtle in form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten with gestures, then it is well; and otherwise, you should administer the extraction of the ear with a subtle onyx of slight duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten because of that, you should make a needle of iron and insert the extremity of the needle into the canal of the ear and close around the needle with wax and softened oil in order that only the needle remains.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And properly extract with your hand a forceful traction, for many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then you should take from the illuminated hall or from the prepared vessel with which the birds are taken a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the ray, and properly envelop over that with a decently placed cloth.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And properly insert it into the canal of the ear with ease, and properly dry out the ear from its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten among all the causes which we have recounted, then you should beware of cutting it before it leads to putrid apostema or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you first cleanse the patient's saphenous vein and extract the blood according to the virtue of the matter, and properly make it cease between your fingers and convert the ear into the parts above, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear, opposite the grey matter of the brain.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And the incision should be of lunar shape until it reaches the pyrrhea, and when the pyrrhea is darkened, stop that if you can with appropriate instruments; and properly close the incision at that hour with speed, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lies in the ear is one of those grubs that you think and are inflamed, then you should administer the cure and extraction from there; but if it does not obey your will, then you should take a subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the abscession of that grub which is caught in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not make a mistake when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause it in many cloths, and properly extract from those with onyxes or subtle gestures, or by incision as we have said, because it is relieved the extraction from there.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses stornutation according to conditions at first, and fills his own ear with some old cotton, and waits above that ear where the water is, and if forgotten, well; but otherwise, you should take many sharp needles and lions according to the length of the digit, heat those in the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the canal of their own ear and wait for a short time until another needle strikes another needle which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not cease with pyrrhea until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water will be forgotten in this way that you take from paper or parchment, i.e. and place one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until the middle part is consumed.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And properly place another parchment and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and extract it with a needle as above is said of the pyrrhetic extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is small-sized, just as much and so on, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large-sized one which appears to the sense of smell, then you should administer the extraction from there with gestures and onyxes, and the cause of it is easier than all the other causes that catarrhize in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confirm your cure, then you should look at the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then you should extract it with gestures or subtle onyxes; but if no cause appears, then you should take a needle that is straight and wide, the form of which is as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can bear; and properly suck with it a strong sucking, and do this many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your will, then you should stop and close the circuit of the needle with wax as we have said; and administer distillations which the ancients have already tried in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is your effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, the form of which is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of iron, straight down, with a small hole, and on the top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore, it is as if you were to fill that which is in the concavity of the needle with what is necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the extremity of the needle decently, and properly place oil in the concavity of the instrument, or juice from some herb, or what you want from these medicines in the needle - and that is in the ear -, and properly insert the ray with a decent cloth above and express with your hand that which is compressed temperately until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping out.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear has already been heated with fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you will dilute in the ear is not too hot, for the medicines of the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Cure of Ear Stoppage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some times, some children and even some men experience ear stoppage due to a blow or a wound in that area; and this ear stoppage sometimes occurs at the forehead of the ear which does not follow the sense, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the forehead of the ear, which does not comprehend the sense, is in the most difficult disposition for hard-to-cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which comprehends the sense, it is necessary that you pause the patient's ear to the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if apparent oppression occurs, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is the form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is in the ear where there is a small latitude, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two lion-like claws on either side, so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the ear stoppage is due to flesh born in the ear or at the forehead of it, then you should take that with subtle onyxes and cut through that with violent facility until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the ear stoppage is in the forehead of the ear, then you should take a subtle iron ray and heat it with fire a little, and properly place that in the forehead of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you have felt oppression with what the patient has found with facility, through the weight of hearing, force the oppression of it with facility; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And properly place in the ear a cloth of linen according to the quantity of the width of the hole which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some oil and dip that into water and powderize it over there, and use it; and if the ear is already apostemated, then you must extract the pus and substitute it with another substance which you will wrap in wax made with rose oil, so that the apostema becomes cool; and properly cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then you should submerge a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use another cure that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the Cure of Athazils Which Cause Blinding to the Eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athazils which cause blinding to the eyelids of men sometimes are humid, and at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you take those with tenhalls or onyxes and cut them with the spatula of its own roots, and properly place it over the places according to their nature.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with bleeding comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lunar cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to apply it to the incisions and many times they return when there remains some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of Grandissia Which Comes to the Eyelids of Men.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times it occurs in the eyelids of men some cause which is akin to grandessia in its strength and hardness, and because of this grandessia is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an aggregation of great humidity above and below the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in them is that you should consider whether the grandessia proceeds from there where it appears on the eyelid and is spread to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, find above it with an incision by latitude, and properly search for it from all parts with facility until it evaporates, and properly suspend it with onyxes and abscess it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared with the incision of it, and only push it through the eyelid with a small incision by small increments, then this is not done in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you should adjust it with a suture; and cure that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then you will not suffer evil from that, because the ointment of it restores that and incorporates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the grandessia is declining to the outer parts of the eyelid, then you should remove the surface outward, and properly ease the eyelid and suspend the grandessia with onyxes, unless you desire an incision, and press it from all parts; and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this is not done in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And properly make the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure the place with that which incorporates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the Cure of Axirnah in the Eyelid above the Eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axirnah is a greyish substance which is generated in the tunic of the eyelid above, and most commonly affects children, aggravates their eyes and causes great pain to them; and they cannot gaze at the brightness of the sun because of it, as tears are shed upon them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason, you should wipe their faces with a cloth every time, and on their faces they sleep; and thus to the eyelids of theirs below, the upper lids are humid, which already has been covered by inflammation, and there is imminent danger of apparent suppuration in the eye; and when you press the place with those words you said, you will bring forth suppuration within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in him who the patient places his head on the top, and properly places a cloth on it and makes a calque, and makes from it a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach from all parts, and properly places that above that and presses with those words said of all so that suppuration may be aggregated in the middle of the circle, and properly finds himself in the midst of that humidity with a spatula incised with an incision by latitude, and the incision is not greater than the incision made in flaubotomia.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the forehead it is necessary that you cut the cord whole until you reach suppuration, for in the most desperate dispositions, suppuration proceeds through incision according to the form of white graying.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped between the said ties to the outer parts and roll back and forth with your right hand and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust the incision because with the spatula you will not reach the eye and it will be lost.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if no suppuration appears to you at the beginning of the incision, but rather that you adjust the incision a little with facility so that it may proceed with suppuration; and properly extract that as we have said; and properly submerge cloths in water, vinegar, and poultice and apply them over the place and strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus, some that are salty, pause it in the concavity of the incision because this is what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And properly cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a painful abscess in the place, then properly cure that with soft poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the Manners of Testing the Eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of men there are born natural and ancient folds, then those do not belong to the eye and cause to appear mannerisms of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of eyelids and skin until that becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called testing the eye, and it is cured in four manners: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization; or made by atactination through incision and suture; or by canals as you will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore, it is necessary that you place the patient's head in the top; properly convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, then it is well; and if not, insert a needle into that which has faith on the part most distant from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the faithful one above, and this will be - near the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs - next to the hairs, and pull out the needle towards the upper parts with the eyelid, and convert it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And properly find yourself at the outer part of the eyelid below the hairs, with a spatula incised by latitude into the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor; and properly extract the needle and pause beneath the eyelid with small powder or cloth, and properly send your hand over the eyelid with caution, and it will be as if it were a figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for this is diversified in men, for some of them require that a great quantity of the eyelid be incised according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And properly find yourself with the spatula on the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the lacrimal major towards the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs like it is the greatest part of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And properly place the onyx in one of the two angles of the cord, and properly excise that whole, and properly adjust with a suture the two lips with a gullet or fine wool, and wash away the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads to the upper lids with some causes observing, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And properly loosen the suture of the threads in three or four days, and properly cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without suture and cure that with something that dries and constrains, for the eyelid is lifted from the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of pus; but suture is better. And thus, those who are wise will not tax you.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in this case, there is solicitude about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in vain.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner in taxing, and it is that you mark on the eyelid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and properly lift the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to take three threads, and this is not equivalent, then you should take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert another thread on the lacrimal major, and the second thread on the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the said ties the threads with equality, and properly, with those, lift your hand with equal elevation, lift all the cord above which is marked as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And properly adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there is an abscess from your incision or your wound, settle that abscess with cerote and similar powder, and with gentle touches.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes the eyelid becomes converted to its own hairs, then it is necessary that you use in that what we have said about incision; but suture in any case is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Atactination by canals is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure which is below according to what I have recounted; and properly by art, make two canals or two fine tubes from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width is smaller than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And properly add each one with subtlety above that which is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each part with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days, for the cord will die and be separated and will sink in until it falls by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then properly break the threads with tornoras, and properly cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the Lifting of Pricking Hairs in the Eye with a Needle when the Hair is Hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are unnatural, hard and rough and prickly to the eyes, then the operation in that case is that you take a fine needle and pause it on that thread of fine and subtle wool, and properly adjust the ends of it and notice all things in a manner quite subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And be the length of the threads of the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And properly you compose another fine thread below it in brief, and knot the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And properly place the patient's head in the top and be next to the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And properly insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair which has required engineering, and make it penetrate into the eyelid hastening until you extract that above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And properly pull out the hair above and insert it into its place, and be the hairs one or two or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And properly pull out your hand with that until the hair is outside and in its place in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if it is attracted to the eyelid and not removed the hair, then you will pull out the eyelid from the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until it is removed from above.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at that with the vision of the eye, because then you will remove the eyelid and the thread, and all the hair and skin around the eye, and leave the clamps for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows well on top of it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, then you will adjust one long hair from the natural hairs, and it will be lifted with that, or let it grow until it becomes approximately as long as the space between them, and then you will lift that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the Cure of Echacration which appears on the Eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it appears on the eye echacration, and it is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted in its own direction, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wound or scarring or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this echacration is either natural or accidental, and is caused by consolidation of wound or scarring or cauterization, or by resemblance to their maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in this case is that you will cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it where there is a piece of cloth between them, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary that you use a cure for this from the causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do so, it will return to echacration even worse than at any time without fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that from causes which soften as is fenugreek, and infuse with water in which are cooked high and scented leaves of it, or gentle aquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and immerse the piece in it, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce through all the way that is not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have described is nothing but some correction of echacration that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the Cure of Echacration which is made in the Eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This echacration which is made in the Eyelid below, which is truly called vertaderament echacration; and it is of some natural, other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But accidental is made by wound or by scarring or by cauterization or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And properly extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a spatula wide.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should be, then it is good; and if not, take the ray and pause it in the split figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures on the left side of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And be the ends of the two fissures at two angles of the incision which you have made so that they converge, and be the angle of their union such that when they come together, a figure is formed from theirs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: lambda (λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And properly remove the flesh that much as is the length of the eyelid below, which is the thickness of it.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And properly adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and properly cure those with what we have said of softening medicines and cauls until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if echacration develops through fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut with a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid as was previously said.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And properly separate with a caulus between two lips, according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of echacration when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what was prepared for the form of echacration, and that is in the form of various movements.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan has always prepared engineering in any manner possible to it so that it may return the figure to its natural form or almost that, and this patient according to what is suitable for it from the operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in some men, it is as if the eyelid were solidified above the album of the eye, and prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you insert the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and lift it up or stretch it with an uncial.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And properly you incise the adhesion with a spatula that is not sharp in its inscriptions, having obtuse a little bit so that the patient is not troubled during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be your incision such that it excoriates that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And properly you put in the eye salty water with which you wash; or distillate it from zest dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And properly separate between the eyelid and the eye with a caulus of linen, and pause over the eye wool infused in album of oil, and properly use for four days causes consolidative until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the Incision of the Nail and Eminence of Flesh of the Lacrimal.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners, for either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard and subtle ciphac; or it is non-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when iron touches it, or is forced to take with an ounce, it is abscinded and the ounce is not placed in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin except from the lacrimal major, until it gradually covers the vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of working in this incision is that the patient puts their head in its place, and properly opens the eyes of it, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, and properly collects the nail with an ounce or two of duplication and stretches it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And properly take a needle and insert into that a piece of horse or ox or cow hair, or something similar, or a strong thread, and duplicate the end of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it to the nail; and stretch it to the upper parts, and excise on the side of the nail which is opposite the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that with hair until the end of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And properly you incise the remainder in the root of the lacrimal with a spatula or small forceps, and let the natural flesh of the lacrimal be seen so that through the incision of it there is no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended or tied with an ounce or thread, as we have said, and properly it is excised with a spatula like this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the tunic of the cornea and that there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And properly the incision gets in the eye a little bit of salted or made from sinew, and let it stay there until another day; and properly cure that with what is needed until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, nor is the ounce tied to that, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed thus as you and recounted in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you will open the eye of the patient and take a spatula with a subtle edge, lion-like in sharpness, according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if at times it is rarefied and is confused and taken in its root, then distill from your hour into the eye made of sinew or with rough silk or with salted, and anoint the eye until another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And properly iterate over that operation until all that is of it is removed, except that the contrary aposteme be in the eye, because then you will leave it, and cure at first the aposteme until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And properly iterate your operation over that with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The emminence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the eye with great inconvenience, be suspended with an ounce; and incise it from that part, and do not finish the incision so that you do not excite a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And properly distill into the lacrimal rough silk and made from sinew, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the Incision of Algae and the Water that is born from Adjusted Flesh in the Eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some times in the eyes of some people is born red flesh, and it is over-paused until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches above the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the outer parts and is assembled like a rose of balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in this case is that the patient puts their head in its place; and properly opens the eyes of it and collects all that red flesh with suitable ounces, and take that with a forceps or with a basket; and properly incise the flesh at first until everything is finished with the encisor, and beware of the eye that you do not scratch it with your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And be your incision with which you cut those or with spatula which we have recounted in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which it is gathered according to what will come as the form of it approaches this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that red flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salted, or distill into it a reddish powder and similar to that of corrosive medicines, and pause over the eye outside covered with album of oil until you are assured of the contrary aposteme.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of algae and is seized by a contrary aposteme, and you fear the contrary aposteme, then leave the eye and cure that aposteme with what brings that aposteme, and properly iterate over that with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which occurs in the eye of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But however you must know that you should alienate all cure of the eye from its natural or accidental course, and work with iron, and not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that member is sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the Collection of Scales in the Eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Scales that come red and are thickened over the eye and prevent it from performing its function, and reveal the eye with length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at first that you consider whether the eye in which there are scales is strong and in it there is no other disease than scales, then you collect those scales.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to put their head in its place, and properly suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle duplication, according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two ounces gradually in one mass, according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And properly are collected those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and wash away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins to be removed from the eye and turned around.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not scratch the eye with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is at midday before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not incise anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you distill into the eye green or red powder so that with its sharpness it corrodes the water that is removed from the scales.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to collect all at that hour, then you anoint all with the water that brings relief to the eye, and leave it for some days until the pain of the eye is assuaged and is assured of the contrary aposteme.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And properly iterate over that according to the same manner, until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the Reduction of Deformities at the Nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure deformities with cauterization or with acute medicine, as it is preceded by the narration of it and not healed, then do not make an opening in it but rather open over the aposteme of the maturity of it, and extract all the humidity that is in it and pour it into the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore when the bone is uncovered and corruption or blackness appears in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named the "aspre cap", and is made of iron, and has a red head like that which is made pointed by the punctation of lime or alkali, with subtle punctation (such as is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that over the rotten part of the bone, and properly revolve it between the two said, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is clean.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this will be done some times, and properly restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been excised and remains for 40 days, and is not renewed or apostemated, nor does any accident occur there, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then there is no opening in it but rather to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover the second bone with iron or acute medicine, and when it is uncovered, then you take thread according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extremity of the iron is triangular, and its shaft is first reduced to the extremity thus, as it were.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And properly pause that over the bone, and be that proper to the lacrimal; and stretch out your hand a little from the eye, and properly revolve your hand with the thread until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient by finding the way to come out as you pull your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, then restore the place with astringent and drying medicines, just as it will be healed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the place are restored, then the material that flowed to the outer parts returns to the nose, therefore it is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Eminence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye is swollen to its total extent and does not cause any harm or diminution in the surrounding tissue, then you should loosen the patient, and properly follow, and properly pause breathing exercises in the neck without scarification and suckle for good succussion; and properly pause on the eye a liniment made of aloes, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster over the eye with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the powders is that you take cloths of lion's wool many times, and each cloth be doubled into four folds; and make from those.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And properly place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And properly strengthen on those with a cloth of strong and tight structure; and iterate the suction with succussion without scarification; and properly stop the suction and leave the eye straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the ligament is relaxed, then it is necessary that it be very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And properly stop the ligament for the day and night, just as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the eye is already reduced, good; and otherwise, then iterate the plaster with powders, constriction, and suction until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the Incision of the Eminence of the Tunica Uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds beyond the eyelids just like a grain of millet, and its shape resembles that of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have recounted, which you will introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the part left above, and properly place another needle in the double thread part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and properly incise the location of the double thread and lift it with that part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that motion.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And properly extract the needle and pause on the eye with lanolin infused in oil of olive, and leave it until the thread is tied to the uvula.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And properly cure the eye with that which comforts it, until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather from all parts with a circle of cloth around the eye, and properly be pierced by a subtle spatula that comes to the front of the eye, and flow the humors albugineous, and descend the eye and enter soon.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And properly strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the Cure of Alconatis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease which is called alconati is nothing but pus that is adjusted in the eye resembling water descending and not being that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient sit on the prepared and right seat, and properly take their head in your hands from two parts and press it until you see the pus coming to the left side, and properly dry it and not let it descend, and stop the flow of light, and the patient will see the causes thus as they are.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downward, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for the descent of the pus with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and properly take a subtle spatula and find that spot on the panniculus cernent a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic of the cornea in the crown (in the location where it is visible), until the pus is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is forgotten, then you distill into the eye water cooled in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And properly cured with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the Cure of Water Descending from the Eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable for piercing with a sermon declaring it, therefore that one according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their eye tightly with a string.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And properly pause with your left hand near the eyelid of their eye on which the water is flowing from the left eye; or with your right hand if the right eye is affected.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And properly with your right hand take alumina if the left eye is affected; or with your left hand if the right eye is affected.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And properly place the extremity of alumina near the crown at the thickness of the ray in the album of the eye from the smaller lacrimal part, and properly press alumina with virtue and revolve your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And properly penetrate into the album of the eye and feel that alumina has already reached the seen cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measure of the path of alumina to the front be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the tunic of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And properly place alumina in the location where the water is, and properly draw it down one time towards another, and thus if the water descends soon, then you will see the patient's eye on which their vision is clouded so much, and alumina in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And properly pause for a little while; then if the water has descended, you will put that other time before alumina is dropped.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is dried and does not descend, you will extract alumina with ease, and revolve your hand with it little by little, and properly dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gemstone in that water and wash the eye inside; and properly pause outside the eye, or stop it, or infuse lanolin in red oil and album of olive, and bind with that the patient's eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we do not have those things of our time to pause on which is mixed with album of olive.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient does not obey your alumina in the instrument of the eye due to its hardness - because it is some of those men whose eyes are very hard -, then you should take the spatula which is called alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with that spatula the conjuncture, and do not leave your hand in the hole, but rather make a way for alumina to reach the subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And properly introduce alumina according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And complete the complement of your work, and prepare the patient for sleep with a gentle decent made in which they will sleep on their own back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of it so that its nature is aligned, and not move their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And be the ligature according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And properly remove that from the dark room and exhale their foul vision, and make them see some causes, and properly return the ligature within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do that in the hour of curations or soon after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They had told me that I should alienate this for such a reason, because the water flows more lightly and with great vehemence due to excessive regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if it occurs with caution of aposteme, then you should remove the eye before the 7th day, and correct that with water which releases aposteme.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should absolve the vision of him and pause on his face near the mouth by which it is regulated that he remain in the dark room for a few days, existing in the darkest.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And properly be taken out of that dark place gradually and converted back into their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in each case there is no excuse for the disciple to see some things, and then you should be bold over the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been revealed to us of some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that fire is made in the Ayrac, mighty pierced by which the water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however, I have not seen anything like that in our land which has been perfected with water, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this may be new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magicians, for which it is over those who ignore these:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of earth or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of them with this subtlety triangular, the pointed end just as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the Cure of Fresh Meat in the Nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born various fleshy things adjusted from which some cause is assembled to scorpion's weight or to polypous flesh; and this disease is called polypus because it is similar to that polypous flesh represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is born cancerous meat, puffed up and of a dark color; and from it is born lion's flesh not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is of this lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place them under the sun, and anoint their nostrils with it, and put once upon those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And properly extract that from the outside parts, and properly incise it with what you have comprehended of those with a sharp spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh is removed; for if any cause remains in him by which ablation is possible, then you should ratify this with one of the subtle instruments with ease, until no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if he bleeds or an aposteme occurs with caution, then you should pause the flow of blood; or it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you should cauterize and burn that which must be ablated and all cavities removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And properly be cut in the nose with the incision, where you will apply water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you should know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that inwardly there is fresh meat in the pustules of the nose bones to which ablation has not been accomplished.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce the thread of faith into him who has some coarseness, and nourish in him good thoughts, and pause between each thought the quantity of the said or minute, and engender the disease and enter one extremity of the thread into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since this will be done, let the patient's odorament attract into that which pervades the canals of the nose, and be situated on their gullet, for many times similar actions make children laugh at school, and it is a light cause to him who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And properly pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that goes out on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and properly administer a tightening of flesh with the knots that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already bound by the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And properly extract the thread, and pause in the nose about an inch from the abstraction of blood, and do this for three days or more until the scab is completely consumed by all that remains of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And properly in the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a leaden cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you run out of cure that exists, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for the head-purger maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or earth, which is similar to a small lamp open, like a small shell, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for the head-purger maker be flat, open; to which is attached at the end, with which you will hold that when you cauterize in oil or water that you want from the juices and susceptible causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these head-purgings are precious: recipe of castoreum, of white balustrade, of gingerbread, and saffron, of long pepper, of escargot, of euphemism with a pinch of spice. And you will combine with the juice of bedbug and of calamus, and make pills, and one pill be tempered with tuberous water, and be inserted into the nostrils of the patient sitting facing.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the Foul Odors in the Extremities of the Nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times foul odors are born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and increased in several days until a moderate regard for it is reached.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you should incise that in the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And properly pause over the spot or cauterize or medicine which is present at the location of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider whether it is puffed up, hard, of dark color and little sensation; then do not touch that with iron because it is a cancerous aposteme; for many times the one who incises this aposteme endures great malice against him whom it has affected.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of lion's touch and not of dark color, and times when incision is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and cure the spot with what exists and constrains into being healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the Suture of the Nose and Lips and Ears when Continuity is dissolved by Wound or Similarities.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, few confer on that operation except in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter some cause of those, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with the patient's blood, and then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and properly cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is made whole, then you should cut off each part of its visible cord until there is no blood.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And properly adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen those, and upon those sprinkle blood of dragon and thrice-stamped, and pause over the powder one poultice of diaphanous day, or some other consolidating poultice, and leave that bound for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that poultice and leave that until the faithful ones are abscinded, and properly cure with scabbing into being healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recounted in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread just like to your and make it known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the Extraction of those Causes which come in the two lips in the parts inward.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it is necessary for some men to extract certain apostemes from the inward parts of their lips, which are hard and resemble grasshoppers, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should convert the lips and wounds each of those hardenings in all parts, and properly fill the location with sagacious trifles until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the location with what exists and stipticitate into being healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the Incision of the Flesh Adjusted in the Gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great many times there are swellings over the gum-adjusted flesh which the ancients called albulus; therefore, you should suspend that with once or twice as much as you hold it with the forficulae and incise that in its right place, and leave the serum to flow or the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And properly pause over the location with sagacious trifles or other powders that are stiptic or excitatory.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then you should incise it secondarily and cauterize it, for properly applying the cauterization will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When in the surface of the teeth of the inward parts and of the forepart and between the gums are adjusted rough, sharp, and some times are blackened and are made citrines or greenish until they corrode through the gum and are made the teeth loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and pause the head in your seat, and extract the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes appear like sand until there is no cause left in them, and this will be done to remove the blackness and citrinity and the other things so that they are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And therefore, if this is the beginning of the reason, good; and if not, then you should iterate the reason over those for another day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed many resorptions of diverse forms and figures according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, because the resorptions with which the tooth is removed from the inward part are another of the resorptions with which it is rasped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of resorptions should be prepared by you as soon as possible.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Eradication of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Therefore, you should cure the tooth of its pain with all ease and leisure in all eradication of it, for there is no cause that can withstand the time when it is eradicated, for it is subtle substance into which it excuses itself in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But therefore, when the patient is ready to have that tooth eradicated, you should firmly certify which tooth is the painful one, for many times the pain deceives the patient and causes them to think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that and properly the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of barberries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, as you are certified which tooth is the painful one, and since you know well, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of all parts, and then properly apply that with those said tools or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concieves.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then properly apply in it forceful holds with great pressure for good speaking or strong eruption, and pause the head of the patient between two denials that you hold well so as not to harm them, and then properly extract the tooth according to rectitude in manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it so that it is completely free from all parts with facility and effort the removal of it just as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is worn or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete with a cloth the wear and strengthen it with the subtlety of a ray at the extremity so that it is not torn in the hour of your constriction upon it, as you hold it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work exactly with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard your strength so as not to break it and leave a part of it, and return upon the patient for the malice that may be greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity towards the eradication of their patients, without administering what we have recounted; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to be torn apart, and the roots of their teeth all or some of them, or that you extract it with certain bones from the jawbone, as many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then properly wash the mouth with vinegar, hot or cold, and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is flux of blood in this way, just as many times there are, then you should mix some quantity of egg white and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that egg white does not congeal, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and subtle tenacula with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning is that of a long extremity, short handle, and thick, in order that they may not be doubled when you must work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be like times of thick handle, so that when you strain with them, they will not be doubled, but short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, with descent-shaped handles, and in the handles of those there are teeth which some fit into others and strain by construction, strong and powerful, and sometimes the handles of those are in the shape of a bird's beak, called ciconia, so it is sturdy and has strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the Eradication of Teeth and Extraction of Bones from Broken Mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must eradicate the tooth that is broken for some reason, then it is necessary that you pause over the location with a border for one day or two until the location is mollified; and then properly insert algidest or tenacula the extremities of which are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of theirs are made inwardly like a file or an almond.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your eye with these forceps or tenacula, then it is necessary that you scrape over the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which has no name, but is a small lever whose form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should be of short extremity, thick and small, and not be enveloped so that it will not be broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already you have helped with this instrument having two rams, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the extraction of teeth; for soon it is made with this instrument which is assembled like once great, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity, twisted or short, which has some thickness, and not be enveloped so that it will not be broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments of teeth are many and similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the artificers wise and subtle in their art, find for themselves according to this what the operation means and various diseases; for they are of the diseases to which the ancients did not prescribe nor provide proper instruments, by the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or of other bones in the mouth is broken, or if it is bent, then it is necessary to be very careful over that place where it is convenient for instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should be in that place some thickness, little by little, and be strung or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is forgotten; and then properly restore the location with medicines suitable to this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small bend in the bone, then extract that from that bend and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the Cure of Teeth that are Higher than the Others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are higher than their natural form and more so in women, especially in venerable old ladies, therefore it is necessary that you consider: if one tooth is very close to another tooth, and it is not possible for them to be joined or tied together, then extract that; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument whose form is this; it is similar to a boar's tusk, and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And it should be your incision with which you will incise that in several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that it is not confused with another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an exalted tooth exposed to erosion, then extract that with a file of Indian iron whose form is this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be all of Indian iron and the edge slightly curved; and it should have many small points, like a file with which needles are made, and with which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with ease, so that no other tooth is confused and corrupted.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then properly line it up at the end, and extract it with certain rasors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose part is broken and irritates the tongue, then you should file it down until the sharpness of that fracture is gone and smoothed out, and be filled so that the tongue does not irritate nor corrupt speech.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the Restoration of Damaged Teeth with Gold or Silver Filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the teeth in front of concussion and removal by percussion or by chance, and the patient cannot withstand the pressure that is required, and you have treated it with stiptic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then for this reason, so that they do not decay, you should strengthen those which are strong with gold filling and not silver, because silver becomes green and soon bends, but gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the recipe is that you take the filling and take twice as much of it between two healthy teeth, and properly that you increase with two tortuosities of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or several, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then properly iterate the process to the part from which you began, and strengthen your art with ease and wisdom until it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And then properly tighten the filling so that it does not escape from the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then properly insert the excess extremities of the filling with forceps or tweezers, and add them to each location with gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then properly leave it as straight as Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, strengthen it or those with another filling in such a manner for all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as these are linked:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one returns or two are placed in their locations, and they are reborn just as we have recounted, and remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only good craftsmen and wise ones can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for some cause of cow bones, and it is made from them just like the form of a tooth, and it is placed in a location where the tooth falls out, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves that one for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the Cutting of the Ligament which is found in the Tongue and prevents Speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which sometimes appears behind the tongue or is natural to it, or accidental and occurs by injury which has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that you open the mouth of the patient, and find the existing tongue cap; elevate the tongue, and then properly cut that ligament nerve according to its latitude until the tongue is freed from its recency.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is some hardness or denudation in it, and this is due to the consolidation of an injury, then you should use a knife and cut it along its latitude until you have severed the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not a fissure made in the forehead of the flesh, lest you cut too deeply and bring forth a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then properly wash the vestige of the incision with lukewarm water or cold water, and then properly pause beside the tongue to relax it; thus is the means by which the patient will keep their tongue relaxed every night, lest another knot be formed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, pause over the spot with a cloth pressed; but if the blood flows, then extract it with a cauterizing tool made of lint which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then properly treat that with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the Extraction of a Ranula behind the Tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes behind the tongue, an apostema forms like a little tumor that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and very soon it is magnified to the point of filling the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is that you open the patient's mouth with the sun shining in front and observe the apostema.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it has a dark or blackish color, hard and rough, to which the patient shows no sensitivity, then do not touch it because it is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards whiteness, with moisture, then you should put your finger in there, and cut it off with a subtle spatula, and cut it all around; and if blood flows at the time of your operation, then you should pause above the pressed cloth, so it is a compress, until the bleeding is stemmed.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed the task in that place, until it is washed with lukewarm water and salt; and cure it with another treatment, similar to this one, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the Extraction of Apostemes from Two Ears and that which is nothing in the Gullet, and other Apostemes.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it occurs in the gullet, then are the glands which are assembled together, those which protrude outside and are named two ears, those which when you cure them with the treatment we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the apostema is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; rather leave it until it is matured, and then either you will extract it or it will break off by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, rough, and the root of it is subtle, then that which is necessary is to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in this case is that you consider, before your operation, if the apostema has already rested its shape like it is complete or if it has diminished by some diminution; and then have the patient sit before the sun, with his head in its natural position, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of the tongue between his own most prominent finger and thumb with a noble instrument whose form is this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and be subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you take hold of that tongue and the apostema is shown to you, and cut above it the thin veil, then take once and fix that in its place, and pull that out to the outer parts as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or another way is to take some cause of the tunics, and then properly cut it with an instrument whose form is this:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and is assembled like forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, made of Indian iron well enveloped.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not present to you, then cut it with a spatula whose form is this: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And once you have cut one notch, cut the other one in the same manner of cutting, and then properly wash the patient's mouth with lukewarm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if bleeding occurs, wash the mouth with decoction of scorsone of mulberry or myrtle leaves and similar to those of stiptic causes until the flow of blood is stemmed, and then properly cure that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes you may find other apostemes in the gullet besides those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said in the incision of two notches alike.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I once treated a woman with an apostema that was born in her gullet, which apostema tended to be dark in color, of little sensation, which had already closed the gullet and was preventing her from breathing freely; she was not allowed to eat or drink water, and she was already close to death if only I had not intervened for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the apostema had grown so much that it had filled two rooms in order to pass through two passages.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So I carefully cut through and stopped in one of them, and pulled that out, and along with it was a large portion, and then I properly cut into the other passage, and properly opened her mouth, and compressed her tongue, and then I put the onus into that apostema.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I properly cut out a large portion of it, and there was not much bleeding from it except for a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the gullet of that woman is absolutely healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then I prescribed food, so you did not stop cutting into that apostema many times for a long time, and subsequent apostema occurred in place of that one, which was cut open until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I made it and cauterized the gullet of her, so that there was no additional suffering; and then I walked away and did not know what God had done for me through that.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the Incision of a Hovel when it is Apostemed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh settles in the hovel, and it is apostemed and is long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is on the left side large and rounded, and then it is called a boil.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with the water we have said in the division, and your cure does not agree with that, and only sometimes the apostema is left behind and is subtle, then you should cut into what is added on, which is rounded; and if it is at that length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and shows no sensation to the patient, then you should take care to make the incision of it, because in that there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you cut into it according to the manner that I have said about its whiteness and length, so that you make the patient's mouth open and take hold of her tongue with an instrument whose form is as follows, and then put the onus in the new one, and pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two notches.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not cut too much, but only as much as is adjusted to the natural term without addition, for if you cut too much, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then use the instrument that we have recommended in the incision of two notches, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use the instrument in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of cauterization is only with sharp water, and that you stop the patient's head in its natural position, and then press her tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and pause there not thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	So that the extremity of it is in the concavity where the medicine is paused just like the concavity of a spoon, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient will gaze upon her own latz so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one flows inwardly through the intrinsic medicine, so that none of those causes will descend onto the gullet of it and harm it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then properly take your time and medicine, and express that on the uvula for a space of about an hour until you see that it is blackened and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a canal above until the cotton adheres to that canal, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it be for about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then properly cauterize again in the circuit of the uvula with cotton enveloped in border, and clean it thoroughly with that which is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and be washed with lukewarm water, and be cured with anointing, and afterwards with soothing until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is even more saved than incision and even longer in fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with this method which is even more subtle than cauterization and incision, namely by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, myrrh, origan, rue, Arabic gum, camomile, and similar herbs, and mix all those causes or some of them together into a bath, and immerse it in lukewarm water, and boil; and the bath should be well stirred with decent stirring, and there should be a channel in the middle of the bath on which is placed an instrument made of copper or iron according to this manner.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the uvula on the quantity, so that the uvula is somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process many times until it is dry, and take care not to make this cure at the beginning of the onset of apostemes, for too much would settle in the aposteme, and you should not do that, but rather declare the aposteme of it carefully.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and shape the extremity of it into a bundle of hay, in order that the mouth of the patient be blocked, for the closure of hay prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the Extraction of Spines and what adheres in the Gullet and other Causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times things adhere in the gullet or spine of the intestines or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then it is necessary to extract what appears from those things, over which the sight falls, since you take hold of the tongue with an instrument before the sun, in order that it may be declared to you what is in the gullet.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden from you in the gullet, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before food is digested in the stomach, for then the associated cause of the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient takes a dose of soap or radish or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow it, so that when it reaches the place where the spines are and is extracted, then they will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and tie it tightly with thread, and then place it inside and slowly extract it; or take a pipe and slowly insert it and then pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if they are not forgotten by those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And be thicker than a ray by a little, and in the extremity of it be concavity which you insert into the patient's gullet with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And it will make the patient's head lifted up towards heaven, and take care that the touching of the bone of the gullet does not end in evil or with a blow that breaks the bone or spine, or that he puts his hand on it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But however, that patient which inserts it is mine, by his knowledge of the place of the associated cause and draws it down below, and pulls out his hand with the instrument in his direction, all according to the quantity prepared by me so that it may be forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the Extraction of Blood and Foul Matter attached to the Gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood and foul matter are medicated with the water which we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not agreed, consider then that it is in the gullet of the patient at sunrise, since you have compressed his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you find the blood and foul matter, extract it with a small spoon or with subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and then pause in the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this many times (until the blood and foul matter are dead and come out of the gullet) and abstain from giving water to the patient all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vial full of lukewarm water, and open the patient's mouth with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause come forth from that and spoil the water for an hour afterwards by his own hand, because the blood and foul matter will soon as it feels the water catch.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten according to what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cinnamon or with asafoetida by means of the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and so it will come to pass.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operation in the subfumigation of that, which is that you take a bath with ignited charcoal and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which is a channel, and the extremity of the instrument is inserted into that channel; and then proceed to subfumigate; and have the patient hold his mouth at the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood and foul matter, for the blood and foul matter will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not catch, then you iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain from giving water to the patient, and make him eat salty causes and alls, and do not allow him to drink water, and thus it is necessary that with this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which blood and foul matter are extracted from the gullet when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps such as those used in surgery, except that it has some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is inserted into the gullet, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a heron, which is grasped, in which there is a sharpness like lime, so that when you compress any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in warning against apostemes and in section of their treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostemes are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, each in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And so diverse in perforation and section of them through two manners, of which one is by the species of apostemes itself; and thus we comprehend from the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper to the places in which accidents occur in the body, for the aposteme that occurs in the head is another from the aposteme that occurs in the anus; and the aposteme that occurs in the fleshy part is another from the aposteme that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more apostemes are some which do not need to be perforated, but rather through natural maturation of the pus in those or completion of their own accord.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other apostemes are those which need to be pierced when they are crossed, and have not matured according to their own completion, just like apostemes that are proper to joints. For the aposteme that comes near a joint is prolonged within until it reaches what is in its circuit, and soon corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so causing contraction of that member; or is an aposteme proper to a main limb, and if you delay piercing it until it becomes mature in relation to the main limb; or is near the anus, therefore pierce it unripe. And do not need to pierce it when it is ripe, but rather only the one that is proper to the anus, so that it does not putrefy the contents of it and be stretched out to the outside of the anus, and become a fistula, or that it becomes in its own term what is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the hour of piercing the aposteme, and that is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in sweating and pulse rate, and the keenness of the head of the aposteme, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that piercing should take place in the most remote location of the aposteme, and from where there is coming the cure for the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And piercing should be done by the length of the flesh or body part, if the apostemes are in the parts of the arms or legs, and in places where there are lacertae (small bones), cords of nerves, arches; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the aposteme is in a fleshy part, then it is better that you wait for the perforation of it until there is confirmation of its digestion according to completion, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it will prolong the body's decay and many foul-smelling things, and soon the lips of it will be hardened and its depth will increase.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some apostemes should be pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or body part as necessity demands, or according to what the member itself requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer a small piercing for small apostemes, and a large piercing and broad or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the apostemes.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are others among the apostemes in which it is necessary to curve and incline the code (meaning of the word "code" is unclear), when it is made thus that it lies still, just like those that occur in tropes of double abscesses and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And among those are some that are incised with section having three angles; and of those is one in which it is incised like the figure of a mint leaf, just like the apostemes of the gonorrheals.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And among those are some in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one which does not have such a head as their superficial apostemes, needs to be pierced with a superficial or flat piercing alone.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the aposteme is large and has collected much pus, that you pierce it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus in that hour; having extracted one part of it, and then plug the aposteme into another day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to gradation until it is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most especially if the patient is a young person of fresh virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the evacuation of pus, and soon the patient will die, and you must open them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	So guard this chapter with great caution, and only administer the piercing in which you pierce these apostemes when you have thoroughly cleansed the wounds and considered whether the wound of the aposteme is small or a flat section; then you should administer some lint or old cloth to it. And if the aposteme is large and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause in each channel until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the aposteme there is abscission of a part of the code or you have concavated it in the circuit, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cloth or a thread of woven cloth, just like when you have torn away cloths or rags, and let its moisture dry; and strengthen it by the third day; and then process it and cure it with what is needed for the encasements until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs in the hour of your operation, then you must apply lukewarm water and vinegar to those places where you have wrapped a cloth around it, and pause over the location of the blood flow many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure, and powder the ones which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the aposteme is a place of many nerves, then it is necessary that you apply poultices in warm wine and oil cautiously, and pause them on those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or in wine and oil, and let them be cool until the third day, as we have said, and then it is necessary to remove the aposteme and cleanse it and administer the cure for what belongs to it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus this is what is necessary for the understanding of the cure of apostemes universally, but according to the method of distinction that I have said about every aposteme in which way it is the path of its cure by chapters individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the Section of Apostemes that come in the Code of the Head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the code of the head, there are small apostemes, and species of nodes that contain tunics which are according to their facts; and the species of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among those are pungent ones, and of those some that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among those are ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and like their own kind; and of those some that are lapis-like, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must not let the extraction of those cause contrariety to the archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you press them with an instrument whose shape is similar to this one, which is called "entromes", until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if that which is contained is moisture, then you must divide it with a section according to its length, by making a superficial section in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins at the section of the line .B. to the line .G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, you must excoriate that part which contains that moisture, and not leave any cause from it, for many times it returns if there remains any cause from it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge the cloth in an Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with that the wound and leave it for another day, for by this method everything that remains of that skin will be consumed.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then iterate over that cloth with an Egyptian ointment again and a third time if needed, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the aposteme contains fatty nodes, then you must incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and cut it on one side between two lips of the section and scrape out all that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your archery causes contrariety, then do what I have previously recounted first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the lapis-like aposteme of section and cure according to what we have said; and section on lapis-like aposteme is less heavy, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are cases of these apostemes which are in the head of certain men, with whom there is no moisture; the cause being that you incised over an aposteme on the head of an old woman and extracted it just like a deaf, harsh, white abscess, which could not be torn away, and if any blow struck it, would wound it.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other apostemes that occur on the head, this is not this chapter, just like the apostemes that come to the heads of children and ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the piercing at the lower part of those, so that it may be alleviated the body of the pus in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure those with what belongs to their cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the Section of Scrofulas which occur in the Neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these apostemes occur in the neck and axillaries and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many which are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is contained within its own tunic, just like in the nodes and apostemes of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some are lapis-like, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not yield to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color is manifest and corresponds to the color of the code, and is spread out over all parts, and not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, and is not swollen, it is necessary that you incise that with a superficial section from above to below along the line .G. to the line .B., and scrape out that part, and extend two lips of the code with one or many cuts if needed, just as we have said in the apostemes of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve. And if your spatula is not quite sharp, do not adjust it to your hand and incise, or that will trouble the patient, and you will incise something that is not necessary to incise; for if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then pause in the wound, beset with vermillion or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the wound, and leave it until the acuity of the aposteme subsides and the wound becomes softened and begins to be purged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is evacuated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with the sign you said indicates if there is any remaining cause of other small scrofulas, therefore incise those and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of a large scrofula, then you must not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	It is better to leave it alone, and tie it with a doubled thread strong enough that it will not cause any harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary that you adjust the two lips of the wound and suture them as soon as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you find that there is remaining superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you understand how to incise its root, and extract it and administer a suture and do as said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And that of the scrofulas which contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial piercing here where you see the location of its maturation, and pause in the piercing at the part of the body where the pus is below, just as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the piercing, with poultices and ointments similar to those, so that it may be consumed what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleansed, you must cure it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the Section of the Pilholt of the Aposteme which occurs in the Gullery.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section "Epilholt", and we have not seen anyone in our land who has done that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men who have esquinence, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilholt, because through this it will not be done with benefit, for all the veins and major parts of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have apostemes in the mouth or gullet or both ears, when the disease is not in the hair, it is necessary to use the section of epilholt to avoid the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to do this, it is necessary that we incise the epilholt below three circles of the epilholt, or four with a small section by latitude in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is in cartilage, not in bone, and this place is suitable for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from there are blocked.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is timid, then it is necessary that he extend the cord of the gullet with one cut, and then make an incision in the cord so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the ciplach according to what we have recounted; and it is signified over the section of the canal by the flame which is from that very eye, mixed with water that is broken and separated, and through the abscission of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is restored in which the perforation is feared, add two lips to the cord of the wound, and suture it alone, except for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow back, until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And thus Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon which we have recounted is an exposition only to see that some of those apostemes have filled up the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come near death, and his tongue has withered away, and some are about to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the location of the wound through some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and it takes three days; and then I command to close the wound, and cure it so that it may be healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my eyes is that a servant took a spatula and inserted it into his own gullet and incised a part of the windpipe, and you were called to the cure of him, and he began to moan in that way as one who is dying, and uncovered the wound and bled the blood which was issuing from the wound little by little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you were confessed that he had not incised a vein nor jugular, and the breath was coming from the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not suffer any harm, except for some difficulty in his voice, and after some days he returned to his better disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say to you that there is no fear in the section of the epilholt.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the Section regarding the Aposteme which occurs in the Gullet outside, and is called Hernia of the Gullet.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This aposteme named hernia of the gullet is a great aposteme according to the color of the body, and it occurs more often in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no hope of curing it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one is similar to grassy nodes, and the other manner is similar to an aposteme made by constriction of an artery, and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to make presumption at all except in the one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with that and investigate it according to the said, and if you find it similar to grassy nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you must incise it just like the nodes, and extract it with water that contains the skin and bursa; and otherwise, then examine everything about its being, and then cure the location where there is need for cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the Section of the Species of Nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are many species and I have already said all their species in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that you recount thus the difference between node and excrescence, so as to dispel doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore you say that with excrescence there is warmth and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is subsided; and it is completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with node there is no warmth or fever or pain, and it contains a cartilaginous bone which is its own proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its commencement is like a cheese and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, either grassy and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, according to what I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, it is necessary that you expose it and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called intro-mes, according to what will be found in the chapter that is appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiring into apostemes and all nodes, which is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid location which you find in the apostema, and you will revolve those digits around that little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cord.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finally your hand will be according to the measure of the greatness of the apostema, and then you will extract the intro-mes and consider what is situated in the footprint of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you must incise it with a superficial section, according to what I said in other apostemes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the footprint of the intro-mes, then you will know that it is grass.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry upon it with a section having the form of a cross, according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	just as I have taught you, and suspend it with an incision, and excise the cord of all parts with facility, and save the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract that pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and often times it happens thus, and then you must extract it with forceps until there remains no cause from it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if there remains no cause from it, either too much or too little, the node will return according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that some small part remains from it, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and pause over that which contains the aposteme cautiously, and cure that otherwise until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a great node, then you must suture the two lips of it and cure that with water which congeals.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsating vein is opposite to it, or non-pulsating, then you must compress and bind the location of three threads that are vitriol-like, and leave it thus straight for two or three days until the wound is cleansed and the ebullition of blood subsides; and then return to incise what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the Forms of the Instruments Necessary in Section and Perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those which are the forms of intro-mes, and there are three species, that some are great, and of these is a medium-sized one, and of these is a small one.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of great intro-mes is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of medium-sized intro-mes is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small intro-mes is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, with a rounded extremity and decently curved, in order that the instrument may be introduced into the apostemes.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of instruments, and they are named "albered", and one of them is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three species, which are great, medium-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great instrument is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of medium-sized instrument is this:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of small instrument is this:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	And these forms are suitable for those apostemes, excrescences, and fistulas, as well as buboes, so that among them there are some related to bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these are made of redwood, thick woods, and lemons, just like great needles with which the seams are sewn, and they are fashioned from citron wood, or oak, or iron, or silver. And the best ones are when they are made of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead instruments, which are adapted to those that are full of fistulas in the confluence of the vessels, where there are reflections that are reflected in their lightness and those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, which are some that are long, and the others medium-sized, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of great instrument of lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of medium-sized instrument of lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of small instrument of lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of many species, which are some that are simple, with only one curvature, and there are three species: great, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And among them are sharp needles, and there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are needles with two curvatures, and there are three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And among them are needles with three curvatures, and there are three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a great simple needle, this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium-sized simple needle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple needle, this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a great sharp needle:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized sharp needle, this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small sharp needle, this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a great needle with two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized needle with two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small needle with two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a great needle with three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized needle with three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small needle with three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels with which the nodes and apostemes are cut and excised, and there are three species, which are great, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a great scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those instruments with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that it may be done gently in the excision of nodes to avoid cutting into a vein or nerve, and for this reason the patient will be healed and will have tranquility little by little as the apostema is excised.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small, just like veins.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of a great forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium-sized forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of citron wood and resemble a ray with which some kind of alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the left extremity that there is a small puncture marked with a spatula hidden and on that side it runs to the parts outside and inside when you want, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulae, which are hidden between the fingers when performing the perforation of apostemes and do not perceive the maladies, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of absorbent forceps with which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three species: great, medium-sized, and small; these forms are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citron wood, rounded with some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that you have these species of absorbent forceps, great, medium-sized, and small, so that with them you can stop the flow of blood quickly in necessity, and then when it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, you do not use those absorbent forceps to stop blood in every part of the body, nor do you use them except in fleshy areas, such as in the groins and thighs, and in the armpits, and similar to their own fleshy areas moistened by moisture.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes they are made of those instruments, other small ones resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is stopped when it is done through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the cure of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become inflated as they begin to be fat, and then they are swollen like women's breasts, and full of apostemes, far away.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for him who has this problem, you must incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise the entire swelling, and then fill the wound with a medicated substance, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure him until he is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to its natural shape and is softened by its magnitude, just like it does in women, then you must cut it into two halves along its peak, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each one contained within the other until the end of each one, so that the major line contains the minor one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. And then excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the swelling, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, which are necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut due to the patient's anxiety and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a piece of submerged cloth soaked in corrosive medicine and leave it until the corroded part that remains of the grayish color is gone, and then cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the perforation of apostemes that come from below the navel.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Those apostemes that come from below the navel are of the species of scrofulas, which are hard and contain a sack.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of those contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the liquid that is in the apostema has been evacuated, then you must fill it with a piece of clean cloth and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cloth should be left to dry and be cured with a suitable ointment, until he is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the apostema is of the species of nodes or scrofulas, then you must cut into it just as we have said in the section on scrofulas, equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended in such a way that it would make a poultice, then you must apply a cauterization to it just as we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of apostemes that occur through artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the cord that is consolidated above it is broken, then many times an aposteme occurs. The signs by which it can be known that inflammation and aposteme are due to the artery or vein: for when the aposteme is due to an artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and when you press the aposteme with those fingers mentioned above, you will feel a stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein is rounded on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this aposteme is erroneous, and especially in those that are below the elbows, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is due to its own inflation of the artery's orifice, you must cut into the cord with a section in the long direction; and then draw out the section with forceps and bring it against the artery, and deliver the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then insert the needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with two threads in two places, — which causes you to see the eyesight of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then push the spot which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it comes out and the aposteme is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer cure in which pus is generated until the ligaments break down; and then cure that with suitable ointments according to this, until he is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an aposteme due to the section of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as much of the aposteme and the cord as is possible, and then insert the needle below the spot which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that single fold until you extract that from the other side, and then tie off the aposteme with two ligaments as I have said to you about the ligament of the grapevine between two parts at two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will break, then insert a double thread with that needle below all the aposteme as the first incision of the needle, and strengthen those threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then cut the aposteme in the middle of it so that when it is situated as it is, you must incise the surplus of the cord, and leave what remains tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with certain powders and ointments until he is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the Aposteme that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as the aposteme occurs in arteries and veins, and similarly the aposteme occurs in nerves when it is caused by percussion or excessive strain, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made in the most part of it in the places of the assistants or of the tarsus, or in all places where the joints are strained.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a great aposteme, and it is like the color of another body, and it is in the places where the nerves are disposed to their own accord, and when it is stretched with vehemence, one feels in oneself as if the patient were in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an aposteme aggregated in the front of the body, and therefore it is left behind, and it is strained to all parts and does not go to the parts before nor behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to be treated with iron, for it would quickly produce contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or on the forehead should be cut open with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small aposteme, then take that which is on the forehead and cut it off with forceps.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you must suspend that which is on the forehead with forceps, and excise it, and then stop the bleeding; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure that until he is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the aposteme which occurs in the navel region, similar to that which occurs at the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	I will describe to some men many times what I have observed in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungals by similarity to those with fungi, whose root is subtle and its head is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is one of those that is small, and it is one of those that is very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in its belly were two theils which resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them as to their whiteness, of very fine root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were inverted and were tearing apart, and moisture was flowing from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and cut them into a piece that weighed 18 pounds. and the other one was about 12 pounds.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the theil is white, humid, with a fine root; then you cut it open with a spatula, and let it be in your presence over the fire, for many times the section of it will expel much blood; and if you see the blood flow, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is poor and timid, guard yourself from cutting with iron; but take a thread of lead freshly made and strengthen it on that theil, in the manner which we have described; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead thread greatly on that theil, until it is cut off and falls away from its own weight.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the theil is of coarse root, then in its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, and most especially when it is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But possible is that you cut off the majority of it, and then cauterize that so that it will not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure that until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And guard yourself that you do not presume to cut off a theil which is of dark color, with little sensation, and without regard, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back with a reminder of cancer just like this.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of the swelling at the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The swelling at the navel is caused by many factors; or by fissures of the skin which is above the belly, and it is seen on that spot or bud according to the manner in which it develops in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by coarctation of the ventricles in that place.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and by bursting forth of the bud, then the color of the aposteme is similar to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the bursting forth of the bud, then the situation of that is like what we have recounted, with a more violent diversity; and when you press that with the threads mentioned above, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and soon after it is on the surface, and it is very magnificent in its descent into the bath and violent labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if due to moisture, then it is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constrained or crepitated.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then accompanied by these signs, the aposteme will decline into blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh nothing, then it is a great and large and hard aposteme, and it is formed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to coarctation, then the touch of it is cold.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider whether the swelling at the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or coarctation; and then you must be prohibited from curing it, because in that there is fear and dread, just as I have taught you in the chapter where I described the apostemes due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the swelling at the navel is due to the bud or the skin, then you must command the patient to hold his breath and be standing upright; and then send someone to examine the entire circumference of the navel, and then command him to stand between your arms over his own shoulders, and then circulate around the navel with a spatula flat in the circuit of the location which you have indicated by the examination; and then extend most of the aposteme to the upper parts with a great force or with a cord, and then tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or with a cord, and do so decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then draw the middle of the aposteme, which is extended over the ligament, and insert the said thread into that indicated spot and seek the bud; and if you have not found nor watched by the ligament, then you extract the abscess and impel the bud towards the internal parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then take that with a thread; and cut off the surplus of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then you must circle around that way, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads, and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the aposteme in a cross-like manner, so that they will penetrate; and then strengthen the aposteme in four parts on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, stop the needles and leave the spot until the stretched flesh falls away by itself; or cut off that which is subtle and can be removed, and then cure that with water as needed until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the swelling of the navel is due to flesh nothing in that place or by moisture, then you must conquer the aposteme as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there, and then cure that with water as needed and consolidate the spot.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division, about the species of cancer and how it is cured with medicines, and what is to be avoided in curing it with iron so that it will not become ulcerated; and we have also said that cancer is generated through excessive and reckless treatment of the wound.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some times cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, just like a crab which is on the nipples or in the armpits and their likenesses of limbs, and mostly when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and great, you must not attempt to operate on it, because I have never seen nor heard of anyone being able to cure it once it has reached that stage.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in this case is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge him of black bile several times, and then sign him, if a manifest fullness has been found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for operation, and prohibit the use of thread-like fibers that are needed for that; and concave all parts with a good probe so that there remains no cause for the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut it slightly, and express the places, and wash away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is at your disposal among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you encounter a great deal of thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Cure of Hydroceles.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, about the species of hydroceles due to water, and their signs, as well as the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of hydrocele alone, and it is not approached by iron to the species of tympanic sac or the species of hydropathy, for this is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrocele tympanic sac with medicines and your medication does not bring relief, then consider whether the patient has been debilitated or if he is suffering from another illness, just like one who is in his throat or chest and similar to those, then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear is over this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of excessive virtue and in this case there is no other illness besides hydrocele alone, and not an infant or an old person, then the method of operation for it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and minister to him properly by expressing his belly with his own hand, filling the water at the end of the pentilh, and then take a sharp instrument in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	be two sharp parts long, with a sharp extremity just like an instrument; but however it should be in there some briefness little by little, so that in the operation on that one does not pass into the bud and then lead that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is from one of the budels, because then you must with the section take away from the navel by three of these parts to the partitions left behind, on the right side of it over the pentilh.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to yellow bile, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not good that your section should be on the side where the patient wishes to lie, so that the superfluous parts do not flow to that location freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce through the instrument all the way to the bone, and then insert it into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the bone and the siphac, and you excise that; and if the quantity is one fingernail or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce through the skin until you reach the spot where the spatula will be, and it is the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument with this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of iron or of bronze lion-like, at which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and fashioned is the end of it incised according to the manner of a feather, just like this:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the superior extremity of it is a guard, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that will at once fall upon the instrument, so that evacuates from the water in this middle quantity, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary in this hour, soon afterwards the patient may die by resolution of his animal spirit, or else you will cause harm to him, approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from it according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the patient's pulse, virtue, and goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is caused because it is retained by the bone which retains the hole that is on the skin of which I have recounted to you that one should pierce through it in this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then iterate the instrument to the next day if you find the patient tolerating this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days on fear, and beware of error until there remains only a little water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient and leave a great quantity of water, then cure it with burial in warm sand, and moisten with vinegar, and let it bask in the sun for a long time; and cure it with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the yellow bile and liver near the extraction of water, according to what I have recounted in this that is preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the Cure of Children Who Are Born with Bladder Passages Not Opened.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes one of the children is born with the bladder passage not opened, or the head of his mixture is not perforated (or it is a narrow opening that is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one must cauterize with the perforation of it as soon as it is born with a sharp instrument made subtle in this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the opening and insert a small leaden pin and tie it, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate be relieved and hurne; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the spot will not allow it to close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that of which the opening is narrow should be treated with a leaden pin, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the opening is not in its place are led to this, because of them, that which is born and the tail is deviated from the end of the head, so that it cannot urinate into the lower parts, until it lifts up the head with its own hand to the upper parts; and it is not a generation, for that reason, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of operation in this case is that the patient be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the urethra with your left hand with a vehement extraction, and incise the tip of the head of the urethra at the location of the perineum with a sharp instrument, just like a feather, or as you would cut out some part, so that the middle of it becomes similar to the head of the urethra and the opening falls into the middle location according to what is necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times this happens; and pause there until the bleeding has ceased, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	On the Ablation of which occurs on the Prepuce at the head of the Urethra and Corrosion and Blackening and Adherence of the Prepuce to the head of the Urethra.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this ablation occurs on the urethra and it is an excessive flesh swelling.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these is malignant, and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, you must suspend with a thin thread and cut it off so that all of it is gone; and then pause above the wound submerged in Egyptian gall; and then cure it with divine ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ablation is malignant, of dark color, then you must administer caustic agents near the incision and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the ablation is in the prepuce of the head of the urethra that has not been circumcised, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then you must excise the ablation which is inside to the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure that which is outside, because when you cure both together with the prepuce, there is no guarantee that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And it also happens in the genitalia and the prepuce blackening and corrosion; therefore you must conquer all that which is already denigrated and that which already wants to corrupt or has corrupted; and then line on top of it with a liquid substance made with honey, which is mixed with flour of almond shells and thrice-distilled and crushed errors.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that with the other remedy until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is excessive bleeding, then administer lunar caustic according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because the caustic agent is useful in two dispositions together, that is, in bleeding and in a wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the urethra is corrupted and destroyed completely in an hour, then you must insert into the meat of the prepuce a leaden tube, so that the patient may urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the urethra (and this adhesion does not occur except in one who has an uncircumcised prepuce, and above it no circumcision is performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess) you must excise with a blunt instrument until the bond is dissolved and the head of the urethra is completely freed from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excise those precisely, then you must excise with a blunt instrument some cause of the head of the urethra and the prepuce, and thus it is that when the prepuce is subtle, it is pierced by its subtlety a little bit.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the urethra with a thread of fine silk, which has been moistened in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be cured with wine and stiptics until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the Purification of Children and the Cure of that which occurs in them after Circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as are other wounds: but however since it is our operation and our will, and its purpose is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and way that is easier and more conducive to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired through experience, which cause is that you have found that most of the artists and barbers use circumcisal and purification with a razor and torores; and they use thread with needle and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these methods and did not find better purification with forceps, thread with needle that in purification as the nail, because many times the cord above has escaped, because the cord of the prepuce has two tunics, and the remaining tone is below, and soon it will be forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the purification made by the alphecats, which is digital, that is used by the barber-surgeons, is not certain of the incision of the extremity of the male member, because it soon enters into the groove of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a nail, iron soon interferes and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for purification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the purification made with forceps and thread with needle, I have discovered by experience to be of great benefit, because the forceps are of proportionate incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is just like the sharpness that is below; and thus when you press your hand so proportionately two sharpnesses, and cut accordingly in one stroke; and it is made a compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the urethra from all parts, with which there will be no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you make the child lie down and be quiet, if it's one of those who understands a little; do not let anyone else touch the thread except for you, and that you leave it there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him joyful in all that manner which is possible to you, according to what he receives his intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him sit between your hands most carefully prepared, and not at all uncertain; and hide the forceps in your hand or let them be under your foot, so that the child does not see those or anyone else of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then put your hand into the urethra of him and blow into the cord, and pull that out until the head of the urethra is reached, and then purify that which is attached to it in a scabrous manner.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with double thread, and then attach a small piece of thread below it as the second ligature, and then pull on the said piece and indicate to you the location of the left ligature with good retention, and cut between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the cord slightly and extract the head of the urethra; and then allow the blood to flow slowly, little by little, because it is better; and pause powder above and on the powder, and pause cloth on which a moth has been wrapped in warm water with olive oil recently boiled; and lay that over that for the next day; and cure that with remedy until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps for purification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the outer tips be not cutting and the inner ones be cutting, so that there is no exit for the tip of the claw, and let the length of both sharpnesses be as long as the length of two handles equal in size.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is because soon the internal cord is entirely cut or a part of it is incised.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	So you must stretch that of your hour with your finger in front of the abscessed place and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take it out with a thread and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the abscess remains below the urethra, then you must allow it to drain slowly until the abscess is completely opened, and cut out that part with ease, and cut according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the urethra, lest it not be harmed by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure that with the water which consolidates the wound, and with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut with the cord according to measure, and follows the parts above, then this will not hurt you.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with the water which we have said, until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the Cure of Retained Urine in the Bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression made by pain or by blood clotted, or by pressure or by congestion, and it resembles those cases that we have mentioned earlier about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention of it is seen to be caused by pain which is already in the neck of the bladder, then you must bind the patient with his own bandages.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the weights of that on his own back and stretch his belly from the upper part of his back, and the patient must strain his arm as much as it is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is strained and the expulsion of pain towards the back parts occurs, so that the urine is purged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said, then the cause is very strong and affects the patient, then you must administer an extraction of him with an instrument which is called syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and have a fine needle, like a goose quill, with a subtle point at the end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of extracting urine with this is that you take the doubled thread and tie it in the extremity of the needle or quill for good sewing; and then insert the extremities of the thread into the lower part of the syringe, and cut with forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but instead put it into the canula with vehemence. And then fill the syringe with border and album of white of egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And then make the patient sit on a stool, and envelop his bladder with olive oil, egg whites, and warm water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the root of the urethra; and then double the urethra above the pubic part; and then push the syringe into that; and then push it in until it reaches the bladder, and it will cause the patient to be relieved from the cause and not made so according to this order, but rather it will go through a tortuous path.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch the thread with the wool little by little, because the urine is soaking the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove that and use it for urinary cure, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient gains relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the Quality of Cathartics for the Bladder with Clamp and Similar Instruments which are in Accord with This.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood is clotted in it, or pressure is blocked, and you want to make water and medicines distill in it, then use an instrument called clampcedra, and this is its form: It should be a tube of silver or copper, with a narrow opening at one end and a wide mouth at the other.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But in the extremity of it there is a stopper, which is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And on that there are three holes: two on one side and sometimes three.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it has a concave part, where water is poured in, and it should be according to the quantity that oppresses it, except for addition, until when some cause is drawn out by it of the humors, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, the water should be drawn out, just as the clampcedra does with which naptha is poured in the battles of war at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to procure humors in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out with it the water that is poured in above, because the humidity is drawn in through the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then draw out the humidity with water that is drawn out, because that humidity comes into the bladder soon, and the patient will be relieved.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with the tip being similar to a small feather, and having a fine point on the end.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder and pause in it the humidity that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and tie it between two with a strong ligature made of double thread, and warm up that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity and with stretching descend until the patient is relieved, as that humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from it a circle; and perforate that all around its entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, so that they are turned; and then add the circle as if it were also a natural part, so that you pause in that which you want from the humors, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that to the instrument and make it as you have made with the bladder, and express yourself with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of Pain.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the species of pain and its cure with medicines, and the difference between pain generated in the lungs and pain generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the pain in which surgical operation with hand and section is necessary.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pain generated in the bladder properly is that which is located in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you should narrate this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that the pain generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of its signs is that the urine that flows out of the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sandy color; and the patient feels a strong urge to urinate, and many times has to go, and then is relieved; and with this you will find the anus in the shape of those things.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier to cure children of that until they have reached the age of 14 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is milder because they are between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And from that of which the pain is greater and the cure is easier; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at first to purify the patient with a catheter which extracts all the discharge that is in their sacs; for that discharge sometimes prevents the entrance of the pain and makes inquiry into it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then take the patient and place them on their back and support and guide them with gentle movements so that the pain descends to the bottom of the bladder or jumps from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make the patient sit between your prepared hands and let go of all their things, so that the bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then carefully observe this and all that follows outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the pain in space, then immediately sit down with section on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't feel any sensation at all from your touch, then it is necessary that you moisten with oil the tip of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And observe the pain until you feel it in the tip of your left hand.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your left hand and expel it to the outer parts outside of the location where you are sectioning.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press on the bladder with their right hand; and command another minister to extend the legs upwards with their left hand, and with their other hand to relax the cord which is below the legs, in the part of the location where the sectioning is taking place.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula which is incident from this and its form is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then divide it with the spatula in that place which is between the anus and the legs, not in the middle location, but rather towards the left side of the cleft; and let the section be on that pain and the tip of your left hand be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inwardly narrow according to the quantity that has been released from the pain and possible to do so, and not greater, for fear that the tip of your left hand which is in the anus will grasp the pain of the section and forget its deficiency.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from this pain there is some to which you should be careful and gentle, for the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that pain there comes a stone like a grain, and it is rounded, and it is made for easier extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is this type to which you should be careful and gentle, adjust it into the crevice.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if not so, then it is necessary that you gently press on it or strongly grasp on it with decent gestures, the extremity of which should be as a file with which you press on the pain, and do not escape from it; or that you insert there a subtle instrument with curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot grasp it, then you must enlarge the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut through it with strength using vitriol dissolved in water.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the pain is more than one, then at first you must push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over there; and then push in a little bit again; and similarly do so if there are many more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very great, then ignorance is that you insert it with a large section, for you will cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they will die or they will suffer from continuous urination, as a result of which the location will not be fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion from there until it is forgotten, or engineer in the fracture of it with forceps until that thing is expelled into vessels.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with juice of aloe and blood of dragon, and strengthen that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause over that cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and cold water, so that the abscess may be caused to yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then resupply the patient with their own bed, and do not release them for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has been released, envelop the location with water and much oil, and then cure it with divine ointment and diabolical ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there occurs an abscess that is caustic and corrosive, and from it resembles as if the blood is frozen in the bladder with congelation, and by this the urine is forbidden (and this is known through the excretion of blood with urine), then therefore insert your left hand into the wound and extract that blood, for if you remain, it will provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species, according to what is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And always during the entire course of the cure, you must carefully observe and adjust the medicines that are applied to the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is small and is in the urethra, and it is stuck in there, and urination is prohibited, then you must cure that with what I recommended earlier before you reach section, for many times this cure is accused of causing section; and now you have tried that, and it is not working, and so you take a perforator made of iron, the form of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular extremity, pointed, fitted into a wooden handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take the thread and tie it to that urethra below the pain, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing with ease until the perforator comes to that pain.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then rotate the perforator with your hand in that pain little by little, and you pierce through it until you make a hole on the other side, so that the urine is soon absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is remaining from the pain of the part outside of the urethra, because it is torn and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not available to you for some reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the pain and another thread above the pain.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then insert yourself over the pain in that urethra between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then release the ligature and purify the congealed blood that is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the thread below the pain, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other thread above, so that when the thread is released next to the excrescence of the pain, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you when you tie the thread above to elevate the cord to the upper parts or to return to your complement and close the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Extraction of Pain from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if pain occurs in some of them, then it is difficult to cure it and is forbidden by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of their ways is that the woman herself is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is that you do not find a woman who knows that she conceals herself from revealing whether she has been married or not.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth one is that the location of the section on pain in women is distant from the location of the pain, so you need a deep section and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity demands it from you to this, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is well known and little is hidden.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek out one who is quiet and subtle, or present a matronal woman well known in the nature of women, or a woman who has divided herself from the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then present her and command her to do all that you will tell her, from the inquiry about the pain at the beginning; which cause is that she looks to see if the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary that you put your finger into her anus and seek out the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, cut it below your finger, and then command her to insert herself over that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the patient's anus and inquire about the pain, because she should place her left hand on the bladder and compress it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if she finds it, it is necessary that gradually compresses it from the bottom of the bladder to the upper parts with the summit of her virtue until it reaches the root of the wound.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert yourself over that, making an application of the middle of the anus to the root of the wound from some part or other, and make the pain in that part, and let your finger not be removed from the pain cut below.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at first; and then insert the ray over that section, and if you feel the pain, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know will cause the pain to be released from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of pain are many: for some are small and great, and hard and rough, and long and rounded, and have folds.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are of it by this which I signify about that which I will.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust it with vitriol dissolved and let it be there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare with you the instruments which I said in the extraction of pain in men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is inserted, then you pause powder on the location and strengthen it with powders and strictures in descending order, and do not iterate this; and leave the pain and do not extract it, for fear that the patient will soon die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the sharpness of the blood has ceased after some days, and the location is healed, then you return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the Sectioning of Hernia Accouchée.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquosa is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white cicatrix which is below the cord of the genitals containing the humors, and it is called cicatrix.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some times it is in the proper panniculus which nature has prepared in the part of the humors, until it becomes another humor; and it is the cord of the genital between the white cicatrix which we have said, and it is not this but rather a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which occurs in the genitals, because it pours out this matter into those parts, and some times it happens through a blow made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture is of many colors, because its color either declines to citrine or to blood red, or to green, or it is blackish and fat, or white and watery, and that is the most common one.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is are these: because if it is in the white cicatrix which we have said, then the abscess is rounded and declining a little towards length, just like the figure of a humor, and appears the genital, for the moisture contains all that part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is rounded with a part of the humor and by this one estimates that it is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the cord of the genitals and the white cicatrix, then a tumor forms below the center.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you observe the color of the humidity in the abscess with the instrument which precedes its shape; and according to what is found in the vestige of the instrument, judge from that what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be flebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes fill his body with blood.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then be resupinated over your back on some cause, and pause below you many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left side of him, and command the matron to follow on the right side of him, which stretches her finger to one of two sides to the cord of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and cut the cord of the genitals in the middle location along its length, almost to the pubic line.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to right and equal distance from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white cicatrix encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe, and take care to avoid inserting it; and your excision by which you excise it in parts as if suspended in the more subtle and scrutinize the excision according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the white cicatrix full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between two lips of the section with uncis, and extend the cicatrix to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord of the genitals encompassing, and insert the cicatrix in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert that with its totality or in pieces, and more subtly the left side, because if you do not scrutinize the insertion of it exquisitely, there is no surety that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the humor proceeds from that outside of its cord in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cicatrix, return inside it, and then adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and then cure it just like other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the humor corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you cut out the vessels which are sore to the suspensori, and extract the humor, and then cure it with what we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two parts separately, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you did in the other equally; and if it seems to be one operation to you, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then wash the blood away, and insert into the sections lana submerged in oil or rosy oil; and pause outside another lana which you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the belly of wonder; and pause above folded cloths and powders, and tie those together with a thread which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	and then be pressed two cloths and be filled with lana carmenated according to this likeness; and be made the extremities at which is sewn cotton or wet lana, and be added with stricture in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes from the crotch to the hip, and the second takes from the part of the pubic line, and two extremities above two wounds below and two other extremities above two armpits, and all extremity be adjusted in the girdle of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cauterization in place of sectioning with iron; and it's that you take cauterizing cutlery subtle and that you insert into that the cord of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the water is revealed, and then you take cauterizer according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it's assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce through that cicatrix, and ignite until all the humidity is evaporated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cicatrix with uncis, and excise with uncis, and excise with cauterizing cutlery subtly ignited; and insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and take care not to let the humor be touched by the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is more saved and longer-lasting than the flow of blood, and better than an operation with sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you experience opposition, abscess or cautery in the hour of sectioning or in the hour of cauterization, or bleeding, then it is necessary that you cure what opposition does to you according to what is said, with the care which is suitable for him.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is faint and does not hope for a second operation due to his horribleness, then administer perforation according to what we have recommended here; and it is when you are certified by this that you should know, according to what we have said about the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is necessary that you make the patient sleep over some elevated surface, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And be the perforation wide enough so that it drains all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause over the spot with cotton and tie it off and leave it, so that the remaining water drains out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if opposition occurs in the drainage of water at that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for this reason, because the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound makes opposition and prohibits the exit of the water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water is extracted from the drops, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opposite of the wound a small piece.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is gathered for about two months or so; and when it is accumulated, then it should be pierced in the same manner as before, because the patient will thus pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the Sectioning of Fleshy Hernia and its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the sectioning of this hernia there is fear of losing through pernicious dispositions; for which I have seen the departure of life and being saved by that better one.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you are reminded of the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	So I say that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genitals are constricted and it is made so by many causes: or because of acute and sharp superfluousness which is poured into the genitals, or because of a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it's the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and not found in him pain, and it's a grave abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very often it is abscessed lapificated, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in him.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by constriction of the arteries, and by inflation of those veins just as one remembers, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by constriction of arteries is known by the dispersal of the abscess when you compress it with those said ties; and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflammation of veins is not dispersed from him for any reason, even with compression using those said ties.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section be made and on the other fleshy parts; and it's that you insert the cord of the genitals, and then stretch out the humor to the upper parts, and extract that from the white cicatrix, and deliver the suspensori of the vessels, and tie them up, and insert the suspensori more than you deliver that of all the part of the humor.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	So if the humor is already consolidated in those fleshy parts, then it is necessary that you extract the humor and insert it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the cicatrix, or between that which is between the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that adhesion and insert it with a round insertion.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is a natural formation of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you insert all that is of him, and extract the humor just as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rosy oil and vinegar; and then cure that with another care until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the Cure of Hernia which is caused by Vitis.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vitis is an abscess wrapped in some sort of enveloping substance resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movements, exercise, and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease it is due to fear of that which is preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary that we say operation in that according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to make the patient sleep on an elevated surface; and then compress the suspensori of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie off the cord of the genitals with those said ties and vessels which are proved to be attached to the finger; and have another minister, you, and stretch them out with a vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert with a spatula, sharp and straight, through the right side of the vessels, until the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise all around in that manner as we have said, and in extracting the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then put an needle with a double thread in those places where the life force resides, and tie it off at one end of the locations where it happens to be, and tie it off again at the other end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle location by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with a care that is suitable for other wounds in which you wish to be born, and where the vessels which nourish one of two genitals are not obstructed, because it is not bad for this reason.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if life force occurs to all the vessels, then it is necessary that either the testicles be extracted or that the testicles are so constricted with the vessels that they become deprived of all nourishment through the obstruction of the vessels, and thus be sterilized, or that it becomes so constricted that it does not have a good connection with them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the Cure of Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to a section that ends in the cicatrix extended over the belly on the side of the armpits of the wonder of the belly, so that leaving the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cicatrix or of excision from it, and occurs in two species because of many causes: or percussion, or by sound, or by noise, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by similar reasons.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cicatrix, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess equal in size between the two preones because the cicatrix compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to sectioning of the cicatrix, for at first it causes sudden and vehement pain; and it is an abscess that appears differently from what was expected, with the cord apparently torn apart, and this is because of the intestine's protrusion, and the body of it going outside the cicatrix.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the intestine's membrane, and this is called intestinal hernia Zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with ventosity, and sometimes it protrudes in the intestinal fissure, and here it is retained, and this is also a great suffering for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and evil pain, and more so when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron, there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid the burning sensation in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation for that is to command the patient to relax the intestine with his own hand at the parts outside of his conquest if he obeys his returnment, and then be bent over his back between your thighs, and raise his hips.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which binds the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles throughout the length; and then place it in two lips of the section uncis according to what is needed to bind the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget about the humor of that.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise those cicatrix which are below the cord of the testicles, until the white cicatrix is uncovered from each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you should insert the tie said in this that secures the testicle, between the white cicatrix and the cord of the humor, which is below the cord of the humor, and between the second cicatrix and absolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the humor.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then take the cord of the testicles in your hand and insert it into the parts above, and with this extend the white cicatrix on both sides to the left and right, and raise the humor along with the cicatrix to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search for those said ties, so that there be no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white cicatrix.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then you will compress that to the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread of eight threads, and insert that into the last part of the cicatrix, which is below the cord of the testicles, which is the section; and then insert the extremities which protrude from the thread until they are four threads, and then compose some of them over some figure in the manner of a cross; and tie with that the cicatrix of which we have said that it is below the cord of the testicles with great firmness of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then envelop the extremities of the threads and tie them with a violent knot, so that none of the vessels which nourish those cannot transmit any cause, lest some abscess may occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then pause another time with a knot similar to the first one, three days from now; and then take those two knots away from the cicatrix which is below the cord of the testicles, as much as the size of the said digit, and insert all the remaining part according to roundness, and stop the humor.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert in the part below the cord of the testicles by section, which allows blood and pus to flow just as we have recommended in this that we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer lanolin immersed in oil and pause on the wound; and administer the knot which we have recommended (and sometimes the white cicatrix is cauterized, which we have said to be inserted with caution against blood flow, because many times it occurs) and leave the knot until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the burning sensation of it is delayed, then water cooled down should be applied, and pause over that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with another care for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been cured with iron treatment.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done in this way as we have recommended for the hernia that is on the skin; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section over that with facility of the patient; and then cut in the middle location around the abscess with water that covers that, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the Disproportion that is made in the Armpits.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the armpits just as we have said, and protrudes the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And there is no cause for the genitals to receive any intestine into the genitalia; and if there is, it is little; and returns back in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with that, there is a fissure formed in the cicatrix until it descends into the cicatrix; and this occurs because of the extension of the cicatrix which is in the armpits just as we have said, which cause is that the cicatrix is stretched and thus softened, and the location becomes abscessed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for this is by cauterization just as it was preceded in the narration of this.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your thighs, and then cut the location of the rupture of the abscesses protruding through section by latitude according to the quantity of three days.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cicatrix that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and pause it on the protruding location of the cicatrix, and press it against the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut the two protruding locations on the extremity of the ray of the cicatrix, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not insert the cicatrix completely, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause just as you can know from the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the cicatrix is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this location, for it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On Softening of the Cord of the Testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is fitting for its regulation.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is treating this that he make the patient lie down on his back, and insert all the cord which is softened onto the natural cord; and then adjust two lips with the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut in the beginning the surplus of the softened cord with three or four cauterizations and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then cure through the cure of other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but because it has been entrusted to me to recall it in this book; and the remembrance of it is only necessary for two ways, one of which is for the sake of knowing the science of the doctor when he is entrusted with it, so that he knows the cure of what occurs; and the other way is that we have many times had need of castration of other animals for our uses through those animals, such as mares, oxen, pigs, and similar to those animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: or by emasculation, or by incision through section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by emasculation, the way of the operation is that we make the animal lie down in cool water until its genitalia are softened and relaxed and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to be left behind the handling.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspenders and cut on each side with one section until two sections process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those more than what you will have excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the cicatrix, but only the subtle cicatrix which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better which is done by emasculation, for emasculation leaves no cause in the testicles so that the animal does not desire to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On The Cure of Hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is when it appears as a space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles and figures like a female, with breasts.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes it appears as urine flows from the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, it is a species: and it is that the clitoris of the woman on the pubis is like two testicles of a man a little from the outside, just as the penis of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of men and one of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted flesh into what expels the pressure of that, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine flows that is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On Linting and Eminent Flesh due to Causes of Women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Linting is very little adjusted to natural causes until it is stretched and made legible; and sometimes it is magnified in some women to the extent that it spreads like in men and penetrates into the act of copulation.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, you must take the surplus of linting with your hand or a stick and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop inserting, especially in the rectum of the reason, so that blood does not flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure that with the cure of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that, and very little is left at the outer parts according to the appearance of a hare (and therefore we will call this "diseased flesh"); therefore, you must insert it just like inserting linting, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On The Cure of Leucorrhea.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Leucorrhea is when the clitoris of a woman is not pierced or is slightly perforated.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and it is caused either by flesh not well-adjusted or by a subtle cicatrix or thickening.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or in the sides of it, or in the uppermost part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and prohibits coition and engagement and childbearing, and very little permits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by observing the pulse of the patient, if the obstruction is apparent, then apply; but if it is not apparent, wait until you find it with the fingers or with the ray.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a subtle cicatrix and is attached to both lips, then you must cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you pause on the two lips of powder, and then pause the fingers to indicate both the masses together.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, her arms extended, and then stretch out both lips with force until that subtle cicatrix is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take lanolin and anoint it with oil and pause that on the location, and lie down at home for a day in order that the location may not be consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cicatrix is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you insert that with a spatula or with a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to swelling, then suspend that with a stick, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And be familiar with the medicines that cause blood to cease flowing without injury, such as aloe, and dragon's blood, and gentian, adjusted with album of hoar.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a leaden cannula wide enough to prevent the wound from becoming slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for some days and administer lukewarm water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural birth of other flesh, and it is necessary that you insert according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to purulent abscesses, then do not apply any contrarian treatment with iron in any manner to the abscesses that are in the mother.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On The Cure of Hemorrhoids and Tumors that occur in the Clitoris of Women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the orifices of many veins, until from those veins blood flows continuously; and as hemorrhoids become old and are made thin.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of those species and their signs, and I will say which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the sense, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the mother above which sensation is felt, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a warm bath and then stretch out her thighs with forceps, or with rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powderize on those the flows of blood with one of the powders that do not cause injury, such as aloe and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then apply pressure to her feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make her drink a decoction of Sumatra and scorched mulberries and gallnuts and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take wheat flour and mix it with honey, vinegar, and oil, and make an application on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is absorbed, it is good; and otherwise, make her adhere to two bellows, and to her nipples with scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take lanolin and submerge that in the juice of colicander or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier with vinegar, and make it adhere to the location; and then cure the location with plasters until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But that rough and hardened tumor, which requires a strong and rigid treatment, needs to be inserted in accordance with what I have said in the equal measure.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On The Perforation of Accidental Incontinence in the Mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of accidental abscesses occur in the mother, such as gangrene and abscesses that form through calcification, ulcers, and habituation, and herpetic eruptions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and rough and hardened tumors and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these illnesses, their species and signs, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that you say in this treatise of abscess that occurs in the mother when it is one of those abscesses that causes sanity, and if you wish to know how the operation is done on it with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore it is necessary that you consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and if it enroges and if sensation is felt over it, then do not cut into it with perforation, but cure it with water that helps on maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is necessary that you make the woman lie down on a bed with two pillows; and recline over her back and adjust her feet to the part most below of the belly, and her arms be expanded, and pause her hands behind her nails, and tie each one with a thread to water in due order.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the right path and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the mother is opened, in the form that will come to be as those causes are done.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And then it is necessary that when you wish to administer this instrument, you make it enter into the womb of the mother's belly, and what enters from the instrument not be more than the size of the mother's belly and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the mother's belly, then it is necessary that you apply powder on the texture of the mother's belly so that it prevents the entry of any instrument into the mother's belly.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And then it is necessary that you apply the vertigo that runs in the instrument, above and below, and that the minister hold the instrument and turn the vertigo until the orifice of the mother's womb is open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you dry that with a spatula of lead.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the discharge is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply to the wound a poultice submerged in red oil or green oil which has some stimulating properties; and pause the caustic in the section of the mother's womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then pause before the mother and on the penthouse a clean lanolin submerged in water in which violets have been soaked.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured in two days with plasters that are suitable for it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some times the mother is washed and the wound is cleansed in such a way that it is anointed with water and honey, and then applied to the plaster.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is infected in the mother's womb, then it is necessary that you are prohibited from the cure of it with iron, having cured it with water as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to medicate living beings when they are sick according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is a necessary cause that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs from it; and it is that when you see the woman expelling her parts below and desiring to smell the air, and above that she is inclined by what is on her part, and hastens the issue of the embryo, then know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the issue of life over its head, and the secondine suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the womb of life is compressed so that the embryo may descend slightly because when they come onto its head, they will come out with the secondine, and it is cleansed from those superfluities by good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another this part is non-natural and not to be trusted, because when the embryo is issued from its feet and the body of life is issued in front of its head and its feet, and one hand or at the foot. i., or is issued the head of life and one hand or at the belly of life, and very little is converted over its neck, and similar to the figures of life that are not trustworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore it is necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to beware of error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you have shown all the figures of those things, and which art is in them because it is meant to be signified by this and has been placed upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the child is issued from its head by natural expulsion, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made to a difficult part, and times the virtue of life already weakened, then make her drink, or what women have it, and evaporate the clitoris with fenugreek seed and warm oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife's finger between the said spatula and the cleft with the secondine, or cut that with her own nail until it runs with moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until she brings forth the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with pimpernel and fenugreek mucilage with camomile.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to be compressed and make her sneeze with conditions; and tie her mouth and nose together for an hour, because the child will soon be forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with little facility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then pause the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and then conceive the bed upon the earth; and hold the woman so that she may not fall during the conception.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned and the child dies, then insert those and extract the remnants of the child or tie the body to the hand with cloth and extract that with equality, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On the issue of the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the child is issued over its feet, then it is necessary that you impel those upwards, and then convert the child little by little, and then equalize it, and then take one foot of life and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are issued into the hands, then command it to be expelled, and make it sneeze with conditions, because it will soon be forgotten if God so wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten by that which we have recounted, then return the child little by little into its place until pause that according to natural figure, because that will soon be forgotten with a lighter issue.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take pimpernel and dissolved gum, and pound everything in the mortar with good pounding, and then line up with water the clitoris of the woman, below the belly of life.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cease in water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts below of life are relaxed, then make it sub-fumigation with myrtle and sub-pause that upon it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation has lasted for an hour, then make it cease upon a bed, and then make it sneeze and stretch its mouth, and lift it away from that, and press the lower part of the belly of life with gentle compression, because the child will soon be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Issue of the child over its fingers and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the child has issued in this form, then gradually introduce its hands little by little; and have the woman sit elevated on her neck, with her feet hanging down, and those (hands) resting on the light, and complete its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the belly of life little by little, and then extract what is left from the feet into the ears, until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not forgotten, then take the feet and move them violently, and then press that which is upon the hypochondria little by little until the child pushes out into the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then introduce its hands and equalize the child little by little, and command the woman to be expelled until the child is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Issue of the child laterally, hanging one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is to be reduced in the hand of life, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot go, then make her lie down on the light, and pound the hands of life with violent concussion, and then administer those which you have recounted to be made into mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come, then make her cease on a bed, and then study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the child according to natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command it to compress itself until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Issue of the child with its hands spread out and the cloth of life at the two sides of its right shoulder.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife holds the hand of the child and then turns it little by little, and makes it equal with facility.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and as much as it has been equalized, then pause on the clitoris of life with that which we have recounted of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to be relaxed little by little, and when you have done this, then make her cease on a bed and command that she be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be compressed; and make her sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the prepared fetus onto the right side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it is issued from the mother according to this manner, consider, and then insert the secondine with your own nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended over the face and neck of life, then insert that from the umbilicus, in order that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the child into the lower parts until it pauses as is necessary, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and it will soon be forgotten with a lighter issue, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that triplets or quadruplets are sometimes born, and sometimes not, but this is strange and does not happen often. However, there are causes that are of nature, and they do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they be multiplied or not, one secondine, and separate them by ciphac, distinguish those from the ligament in the umbilicus of each of those. And sometimes some are forgotten as if it were one child for a lighter natural issue, and some are issued as if we had recounted them.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some are difficult or troublesome to give birth and proceed according to that which we have said about the non-natural figures, then you care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does that which makes it easy and subtle, and with delay, and is ingenious according to all figure, as it is prepared in advance of the engendering leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and those which are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some weeks are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that a woman aborts at six or ten months, which is caused by measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this must be in the science of the midwife because very little is similar to that, and thus pause oneself at that with so much as is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the child when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead child according to what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not issued outside, and you are forced to use operation with forceps, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman has healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents by which loss is feared upon her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be elevated on a light over her back, and her head be inclined downwards, and her hands be lifted.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold that in two parts or tie it to the light, so that the body of life does not extend too far during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of life with warm oil and mucilage of pimpernel and fenugreek and sesame.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife takes her hand with those oils and mucilages, and inserts her hand with facility into the mother, and then searches for the right place where the fingers can be inserted into the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And finds a convenient place: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to descend onto its head, and then you insert your fingers into the eyes of life, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or below the beard, or into the furrow of life, or into the places proper for the ribs, or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is into the feet of life, then in the pentalion, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary that you take the finger with your right hand, and pause the curvature of life at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with facility and make the finger enter into one of those places which we have said, until it reaches the cause of the boy.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and make another finger enter into the apposition of life, or the third if necessary, in order that it may be attracted to equality, and not extend excessively according to its rightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And thus it is suitable for all parts, in order that the issue of life may be alleviated as it is done in toothed way for the eradication of life.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that which is between them for the extension to be mollified; and if some part of life is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife take some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and revolve those things that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then it is necessary that the fingers be permitted to enter the place which is more upper; and thus make it so until the entire fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is issued before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of life, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped around it; and then extract it until it is completely forgotten, and insert it either in the juncture of the hand or in the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus it is necessary to do likewise with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or there occurs constriction in the issue, or water is adjusted in the head of life, then it is necessary that you insert between the fingers a spatula with spines and split the head and extract the water, or that you discover that by means of an instrument which is called "alundat", the form of which will come from the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the fetus is naturally large-headed: and then it is necessary that you insert that with an algemat, or take that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is issued and constricted at the furrow, then it must be split open until the humidity which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obeys the issue, then you must insert the head at once according to what is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the afterbirth is apostemated or is in life with dropsy, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the moisture which is in it flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction of life is light and the direction of life to the mouth of the mother is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then it is necessary that you extract that with cloth which you will wrap around your hand, and that you split the belly and feet until the water which is in them flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are stunted and the head returns, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is swollen, then insert your hand into the prenomen of larynx, and seek out that head, and attract it with the fingers into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers and draw life from those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by apostemated pus which occurs to one, then it is necessary that there be no trouble on life; instead it is necessary to administer effusion of humid and greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is on its side, then it should be manipulated as possible; and administer the water which we have said in the living child.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be inserted into a poultice and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And take care that you do not leave any cause behind the secondine.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer the water which we have said for the cure of apostems that occur from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there occurs bleeding, then stop it with astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I myself have seen a woman in the womb of whom there was a dead child, and on that very spot another fetus was conceived, and the other is dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A swelling occurs in the navel area of this woman for a long time; and it becomes inflated until it is full of pus, and begins to suppurate.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to the cure of her, and treated her for a long time, but the wound did not consolidate.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to it some strong adhesive plaisters of attraction, and extracted from it one bone, and after a few days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly amazed, as in the womb there should not be bones.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead child.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I cleansed the wound, and extracted from it several bones, the woman existing in her milk-filled dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, and then brought out a small amount of pus.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not find anything strange, but rather because in this is science and aid to that which the physician artificer administers with his hand for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of ventouse by which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which are harnessed the forces, at which harnessing there are two ventouses at the two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this ventouse must be more subtle and made from something like ebony or boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each piece is two fingers and a half, and the margin of each piece is one finger on both sides, and the length of each is one palm and a quarter; and in the middle of the two pieces are two adjustments that meet to form those pieces which are already fixed, with the length being about one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that they can be opened with those ventouses when you revolve the two prescribed ventouses.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form, more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made from ebony or boxwood wood, according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two additions like times, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with those, then you should have her lie down on a light bed with her feet pendant, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then work with your hand and the instrument as you would with forceps, adjusting according to the quantity that you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the mother until it makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of ventouse which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impeller by which the fetus is driven:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of compressing which counteracts the great head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which has teeth at the end, like times, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, like times, with teeth like reaping teeth into which one inserts and counteracts.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of compressing a little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of finger having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of finger having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which are attached teeth of the comb by which the head of the fetus is compressed.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities by which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of these are multiplied and prepared, then the artisans should be the more skilled in their operation and the more numerous according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not work with those instruments whatever way you should, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of extraction from the secondine.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the secondine is retained during delivery, then it is necessary to command the patient to retain her breath, and then make that person snore with conditions, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of him and over his nostrils, and if by this it has been brought forth, well be.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a cloth and perforate it in the covering of a hole and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the mother, such as chamomile and rue and anise and camomile and scented Arabic and cinnamon.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and then place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that person snore as we have said, and the secondine will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure is not effective and the secondine remains, then you should command the midwife to submerge her left hand in warm oil or in a mixture of Altaic herbs, and then insert that into the womb and search for the secondine, and when you have found it, take it and stretch it out little by little. But if it is annexed in the womb of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recorded, and when you have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to rectitude, so that the mother does not faint from the violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Beforehand, it is necessary that it be permitted on both sides of the right and left with facility.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it should be adjusted in the quantity of attraction, for it will obey and flow away with adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with snoring and medicinal application from the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recounted, then beware that you do not fetigues on that in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is necessary that what has issued from it to the mouth of the mother lies at the bed of the woman, and then cauterize that with enguent and tetrafarmaco; for that will make it rot away approximately some days and be dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it rots, it is elevated to bad odor at the head and stomach, and this leads to illness in the patient; and then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered accordingly.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients have already discovered sub-fumigation with Nazirite and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated in order to retain menstruation and secondine:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made from birch or elm.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it is placed with the subtle extremity in the womb and the broad extremity above the fire, and the sub-fumigation is placed on the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in until the sub-fumigation is consumed and iterate another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the cure for the unbroken navel of the child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born without perforation in their navels, which have become subtle and opaqued.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then the midwife should pierce with her finger that opaqued spot; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and take care not to touch the lacet.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply something on that lanolin infused in vinegar and oil; and then cure it with ointment until it is clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may be opaque, then apply a reed cane into the wound for several days, and remove it when the child wants to pass.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it often happens that the navel becomes opaque due to consolidation of the wound or aposteme; therefore it is necessary to consolidate that, and then cure it with the water and lead which we have said.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure for fistulas that were left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that are left behind in the departure, being lower in nodule and thicker, which are located near the anus or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And since that nodule is aged and runs with white watery fluid or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes some of these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that are penetrating are recognized by what is issued from them through ejection and flatulence; and sometimes the patient uses the ejection, and soon after it is issued red.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the bladder and into the urethra of the penis; and some also penetrate into the junction of the bed and into the notch of the cleft.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to know if a penetrating fistula is present or not is that you insert your finger into the anus and then subtly probe with an elm or iron instrument in the fistula when there is no obturating.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is obturating in that, then you should insert into it a subtle probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or there is no process of emission or redness or flatulence, just as we have said, then you should know that it is not penetrating, and then apply yourself to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then the significance of it is issuing urine from that and prohibition of it to that place where medicine has been consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the bed or into the bone and causing intense pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe enters here if there is no obturating into the bone, and causing intense pain in the circuit of departure; and that from it pus always appears; and that it does not heal with medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is tedious and troublesome work for the skilled doctors on which we have set our foot.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not aged, healing with iron is expected according to what you have recounted to me, and this which I have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his legs up towards you, with the bed sloping towards his belly, and then insert a lead or elm probe into the fistula if there is obturating, until you know the location where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that patient feels pain around his navel, then it is necessary that you insert your finger into the navel.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated and is discovered to penetrate, or that which you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, as there is no healing in that, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it can be healed in some men's hands.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which one hopes for relief in that is that you ignite a subtle cauterizer according to the size of the fistula, just as it has been said before, and then insert that ignited cauterizer into the fistula until it comes around the navel; and then iterate that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh tissues that are like feathers from an owl's wing have become accustomed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with ointments wrapped in parchment until all those adjusted flesh tissues are completely healed; and then cure it with medicines which generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, well be; and if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate into that which is in the navel, but between that and the probe which is a mere speck of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula opens on the surface of the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the extremity of the probe comes to an end, and through the probe is liberated and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those flesh tissues which are gathered like the feathers of an owl and do not remain any cause for those.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flow of blood comes sometimes between you and your operation when you are cleaning those flesh tissues, then take the millstone that is and the pus is lighter instrument is cauterizing with fire or acute medicine, for cauterization with fire adjusts two good habits: it adapts to those adjusted flesh tissues, and abscises the blood excess of humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with ointments wrapped in parchment or in threefold cloth until the location gets braided, and then cure the wound with hard flesh ointment that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And those medicines in which there is purification and excess; when you are restored it is already healed and there is no fear of iteration.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already entered into the perineum of the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if the probe enters and is between you and it is like skin or flesh, and is predisposed to penetration, then there should be no operation in that place except according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it up until you achieve the conquest of that place so that you can insert some and provide the proper cure; and do not process any more with drying, so that you do not insert the lacet containing the navel, and that the patient's wish is fulfilled in the ejection of his/her own will; or dry it up as we have said, or extend it slightly and remove the pus that dries up into the proper place at the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those flesh tissues which are in the drying process until you can see the scarring; and then make an effort to restore the entire wound with drying, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and it will be more difficult for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is ended according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the gluteal fold around the surface of the body with the cord and on the margin of the anus, then take the probe of perforated extremity, which is like a needle prepared for sewing according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that faithful envelope of five or seven, or around those; and then insert the probe with faith into the fistula until you achieve the conquest of that place.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the margin of the anus proper to the outside, then you extract the needle from that wound as you insert your finger into the navel; and pull out the extremity of the needle and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and let it be for a day or two, and when you more deeply insert the needle in the flesh, strengthen it until those flesh tissues which are between the two extremities of the needle and that fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared for, but not too much in the perineum, because it is not your place to do so; and then proceed with it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatula with which the fistula is cut: its curvature is quite sharp and the other part is non-sharp, so that you do not insert what is not necessary, just as one often does.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the insertion of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners, for either they are between the anus resembling carbon, or else those are like a bunch of raisins.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at times and is one, and many, and outside the anus, and in its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, from which flows a yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous motion, and is according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is outside the anus is to command the patient to settle down and to evacuate into the anus until it becomes clean and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take up your knife or what you have with your nail, and then cut those in their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not held in those due to moisture and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of cotton or a woolen rag, and extract those with your fingers, and then cut them and powderize some powders suitable for application at the site of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is small biting, and wash it with that water that is in the navel and that will slightly obey evacuation when the patient presses.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is slight, and it is that you take those with your nail or with an instrument, and cut them, and then cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which you will use for the insertion, should be administered with suturing according to this manner: take a needle wrapped and insert it into the thread and then pull out the hemorrhoids from above, and make it penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the needle in the part farthest from the thread, and so laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, and then remove the needle and thread.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, and leave one and not close it, so that the superfluity of blood may flow from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause over the anus with a cloth dipped in red oil or in cerote; and pause that over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it alone until it forms a scab; and when it is formed, cure those with an ointment or with another cure until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the Curing of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times, accidents occur due to excessiveness or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are so old and no longer effective in that medicine, then you must take those with the point of spatula or with your nail until they become moist and the scab above is held back, which prevents consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must apply those with reason more fervent than the first one, until most blood flows and they are scoured; and then cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the Curing of Hemorrhoids, this is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids, this is the key, and not only notches red according to the color of the skin resembling a cap of clavicle, and it is done throughout the body and most especially in the parts below the hips and above the knees, and thus by these pains one must give consent.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut that which is in the circuit of the key, and to be held with pincers or instruments, and to be eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is preceded in its own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a verruca is a small, hard, fistulous prominence on the surface of the body, and many times they appear in children's moles.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is that you stretch and cut it off, or that you strengthen it with a needle or cloth until it forms a scab.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And then remove them forwards and backwards with the instrument which you will say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a furuncle is a small, fatty or fistulous prominence on the surface of the body that becomes inflamed and swollen around the anus, when the heat finds it, it becomes centred in it like the mordification of a formicula, and is formed around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a needle of goose quill or of dove's feather, and make it strong, and pause it over the furuncle until it contains the circle of the needle in the parts of the body; and then turn your hand with the needle until you cut off what is in the circuit of the furuncle, and pause it on the perineum of the flesh, and that you eradicate the furuncle from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make it so with an iron or steel needle according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The upper part of the needle should be drawn to subtlety, numb (it is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the said point it may be blunted and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the furuncle according to what is said in the cauterization of athyli in the chapter on cauterizing.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the Form of Instruments that are Administered to Give Ointment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes it is made an ointment of silver or lead or of melted iron or malleted; and sometimes it is made from small and large instruments according to those to which they are administered, for that which is administered in the cure of little children is small; and of those whose buttocks are rough or inflamed, the ointments of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Form of Great and Little Ointment:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle above, in which the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction at the point where the bag is tied just as often.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the anus, should be numb (not open) like a lion's, and should be drawn back to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines of animal bladder or sheep's fleece are placed, and the root of it should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by many holes just like it is revolved; and if the space between the holes is the thickness of the said digit.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert the needle into those holes a strong thread of raw thread which is of ten threads, or surround them; and adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is placed on it, be tight at the head of the ointment between two distinguishable with strong constriction, and then anoint each hole: But the quality of anointing it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and take care not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be positioned on their back, with their knees raised and feet placed on the floor, with one foot resting on a pillow or cushion; and the attendant should take the bag and pour it into two holes and around with vehemence until everything that is in the ointment is evacuated into the bedpan; and then remove the ointment and the patient should lift their knees to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to sleep, keep it as long as he can; and if he sleeps with it all night, it is more likely to have an effect.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you anoint him with the medicine for stomach ailments and he becomes worse, then you must iterate the ointment until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or apostemes in the anus, then you must use a gentle and lion-like ointment, one of those with which children are anointed.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the Curing of Wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And now I have said in the division of wound treatment what is suitable for the free, and I will also say the treatment of those with me and medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made and according to the place where the wounds are located.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times wounds are made are just like accidental blows from a hammer, or incision with a sword or cote, or percussion with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the wounds that are in the parts of the body are just like those which affect the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of some wounds because I pause rational thought and rule on other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the wounds of the head, simple ones, because the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, then consider: if it was caused by accidental blow or similar, and already the scalp has been torn asunder to such an extent that there is great bleeding and danger of apostema, then you must take heed and bleed the cephalic vein forthwith, and do not delay; and extract from that wound as much blood as possible according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some other cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the blood that has flowed out of the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it should be a bleeding from the opposite side of the wounded part; and beware the patient ofpletion, and of wine, and of thick foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits from the beginning, then you should reduce the food and not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the wound, if an apostema is likely to occur, cut in with rose oil or wine in which it has been stipticated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain of an apostema, then pause over the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to be applied little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause over some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or is caused by incision of a sword and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for poultices, then adjust those with suture according to what I recommend in the suture of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already opened up to the bone and skin, and there is no retention of it except for a small suspender, then incise it and immediately cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its natural place, and command the patient to be fed on foods that have gruel: caps and forms like theirs, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the flesh putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone, then you must incise all that is rotten and cut it away, and immediately cure what remains.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it is not separated by medicines, then you must inquire about the artery, and if you find it uncut, you must cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not come together, then you must cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; thus you must powderize over those this powder, because it will consolidate before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of saffron one part, blood of dragon one part, and no-extinct cause three parts; mix all together and crush well, and fill the wound with it, and compress it with good constriction until it adheres to that part, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen that above with powders and loosen it, and do not remove it while it remains in this state, because the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes they do this alone, when you are not present and only have oil of saffron and blood of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And now do this same operation on great wounds when it is necessary to pause over them and tighten them, and on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the time of summer, then you must not entertain the position of this powder, but rather cure those wounds with what we have said, by pausing over them some ointments that are degistive, or by pausing over them powders of barley flour mixed with water and honey until they give a poulture; and immediately cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in bone at the wound, and it is small, then you must extract that with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the cure of fractures of the head in this way that is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	On the Wounds of the Neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery is injured, then if it is a nerve, do not intervene with surgery but rather avoid any treatment that would cause violent stiptication, such as using zinc and egg whites which are like vinegar and similar to them, because they irritate the nerves and contract that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause over the wound any cause that is too cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is in the brain, which is the most noble part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if what is cured by medicines is light, just like it is washed with double water, some times infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and thucia when it is washed with double water and the other parts are reduced according to this manner, and ointments moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is great, then administer sutures, or bind the lips of it tightly, and immediately cure that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lowest part of the poulture, then pierce it at the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the wound already has an incised artery and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or all have been incised and the veins of the neck are saved, then you must adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the canal of the neck and do not touch that; before equaling that and reducing it to its natural figure, and immediately strengthen that with decent stretching, and loosen that for a few days; and immediately cure that with ointments in which there is stiptication and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has been made in the bone, then strike it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from them; and what is not united, leave that until the wound heals, and separate it and the excrescence from it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powderize over that a powder which I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has been made into a fistula, then cure that with what I will remember to recommend in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	On the Wounds of the Neck or similar when it occurs between the shoulders and is made with a sword, or with a cote, or with a lance, or with similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow from a lance or cote, and the wound's depth is great, then consider more seriously if there is breathlessness from the wound when the patient faints; know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if the wound is not deep and the wound is recent with its own blood, then pause over it with powder in the first hour, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and revives the patient, but rather pause over it an attractive ointment, and loosen that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then pause over the orifice of the wound with a fine cloth so that it absorbs what there is of the humidities; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that the water that is in it is adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasme nor tremor of heart nor constriction of belly, and other good dispositions are present in him, then know that the wound is saved; and then cure it with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of him is delayed, and all time has been open, then know that a fistula has been made; cure it therefore according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by incision of a sword or cote, and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure it with what comes before suture, if great, or with powder, if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the wound has made an impression in the bone, and some fragments of bone are separated, then twist the wound and extract those fragments, if they can be separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then loosen those fragments until the wound heals, for the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And as for other wounds that occur in other members, the judgment in their cure is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	On Wounds of the Belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or medium-sized.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	On great wounds, some times the bowels or nerves of the bowels are injured, so that there is intrusion into them and the suture of them is more violent and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is seen that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care to bring them back to their place soon, for they open up and are swollen, making it difficult for the instrument to enter.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that there is not difficulty in reducing the bowels, just as there is difficulty in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that suture of the belly is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and necessary in suturing other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other stitches proper to the belly communicate with the other wounds, but however are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you all that which has been exposed and declared.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowels has occurred through it, and it is made difficult to reduce them, then this is in one of two ways: or by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation of the bowels has come about due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this is so, you must know that you should scrape that area in such a way that you submerge a sponge or wet cloth in lukewarm water, or that you gather squinant, cyperum, and spic, and soak the bowels in it until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes I have seen that this has been done with vinegar in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see the inflammation be resolved, then you moisten the bowels with water in which there is a high and bitter taste, for by this it is alleviated the instrument of the belly with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if it is excused the instrument of the belly to this cure, then you should split the disruption a little with an instrument on which there are incised grooves.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better, when it is proper and not septic, and there is no occupation to dry out near necessity and faintness.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the Instrument: It is seen in its form what it is.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is bent acutely, and the other part not acute, and its extremity subtle, and not like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather blunt a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the wound is enlarged and protrudes outside the belly, then you must know that its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on top of it, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the belly, then you must know that you should make the patient lie on his back, and put his knees higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should put the patient's head and legs higher than the remaining parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you must pause your intention and consideration at all times so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is necessary for you to administer this in great wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause over what is prepared for you, and make sure that the minister has all the disruption with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and makes sure to uncover from that to this, which has some other cause for suture.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count the needle according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and then leave off from the extremity of the disruption of the said ring finger, and strengthen the needle one, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the cord, with the two extremities of the ciphac which is left over the cord of the parted parts, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, and so there are made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by decent addition; and then leave off the thickness of the finger and put another needle in it, and then tie that with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary with the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be medium-sized between greatness and subtlety, because the subtle needles barely cut into the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult instrument in the cord, and therefore it is necessary for them to be medium-sized in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted in two extremities of the cord that are properly close together, because then the flesh would not be cut slightly and the wound would be exposed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged in the suture so that the wound is prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient's sleep; and pause over the suture with powders expanded from all parts, which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suture with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two or around that many.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with suture the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle in which faith is wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle part from which it began, in order that the thread may retreat back to the highest point of the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of cloth, with which the cloths are stretched.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture for the amount of time equal to the thickness of a little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I cured the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been wounded by a cote, and was the disruption of a wound more than a palm, and was situated around two palms from the middle of the bowel and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the bowel had been opened up for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or thereabouts, and I cared for him and he was healed; and then I saw him alive for many years, and he was converted to his natural disposition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it was so, for you did not cure him with ointment, for he was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound with a fine cloth twice a day and ablution assiduous with water of honey until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But you told two species of suture proper according to the narration of Paulus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And that is when you began with the suture of the cord, and inserting a needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then, as the needle penetrates into the cord and makes a knot according to rule and in length along the entire body, and leaves the extremity of the ciphac where you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity of the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then, when you have made that penetrate, then you make it penetrate another time into the same extremity of the thread from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the ciphac which is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with your penetration which you make it penetrate into the thread in the extremity of the mirror which is in the part of it until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, starting from this side, close it with the extremity that is of the thread in the other side, and pull out the needle from the cord which has penetrated, and then reduce it into that cord and sew the extremity of the thread that is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and pull out that from the cord which is from part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and do this once more in another way until you have closed all that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with a thread of skin which sews the skins, in such a way that you sew the ciphac once from the part of the extremity of the cord, and then leave it off until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second proper species of suture which you call Gualia, and this is said to be spoken by you and recommended for it, is that you sew according to the natural order with a thread of skin which some medical men sew according to, in such a way that they add all the parts to its corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of another skin and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of the skin, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should put the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own discretion from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that same spot, and leave two extremities of the thread; and then turn back the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in the two extremities of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn back those same ones, and make them penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in two extremities of the mirror that are on the contrary side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common light suture, and it is the suture that was mentioned previously.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And others say that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so it is that you insert into these some thread, and begin with the introduction of a needle of this kind which is due to you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those who sew skins together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than for other locations in the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of wound healing is a judgment about other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is because when you achieve the recent wound with its natural blood before it is altered by air, and reduce the bowel and sew it and adapt it decently, then you pause over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then you pause over that certain ointments which are at your presence, until they make a hard crust and drop their threads, and become consolidated cord and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the healing of other wounds, until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have those medicines at hand, then you pause over that for now, because it begins to produce pus, cote and changes into a different form twice a day, just as I taught you, until it is healed, for you will not need other medication in many dispositions when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may communicate to the main members, then you must soak wool in tempered oil of good quality, or in rosy oil, and pause it in the circuits of the places which are between the bones and leave them there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your own bowels, because many times this has happened, then you must clarify that with vinegar stiptic black tebe, and especially if the purulence is penetrated into the bowel and is made to exit through the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you know that what is from the thick bowels is for a lighter and easier healing than what is in the subtle bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the bowel which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wounds that are in it; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it, and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the wound is processed from the thread, and you obtain it recently, then reduce it according to your own rule with which you reduce the bowels together.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then you should strengthen it with thread on the place that is degenerated from it, so that the flux of blood may return, for in the thread there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert this which is another bond, and pause the two extremities of the thread pending from the left side of the wound outside, so that on you there may be alleviated the attraction of it, namely the coagulation of the thread and emission of pus from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored by certain men, for thus you saw him who was wounded in his belly with a blow from a lance and had an old wound and a fistula, and there was great pain and vomiting.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you proceeded with the treatment of it even though it was not contained in the healing of it, but instead continued to subtletize that into what was already healed and the location was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you saw that the location was already consolidated, and then you turned your attention to the patient who had developed an evil humoral imbalance as a result of the accident in his belly; and none of this was caused by that evil accident and he remained in his natural disposition eating and drinking, and then entered into baths and was exercised in his usual duties.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people will say that when an ulcer occurs in the bowel and it is small, then it is necessary to bind it according to this manner: and it is that you take fromiguas of large caps; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and pause one fromigua of those which has an open mouth on the two lips of the wound; therefore when it takes hold on these and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another fromigua near the first one, and do not cease to make fromiguas one after another according to the quantity of all the wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it and sew the wound; and those caps remain attached to the bowel until the bowel is healed; and there will be no harm to anyone's malady.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the bowel be tied with a fine thread which is made from the bowels of beasts attached to it, since it is more in an agalha; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of the bowel, and it is much desiccated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of it, wrapped, and then insert that thread into agalhas and sew with it on the bowel, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with fromiguas is not but according to the way of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, since then it is not merely a matter of subtletization, but rather a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the healing of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and antiquated, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and produces pus all the time and is not cut off, then, wherever it may be in any member, universally it is called fistula and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulation that is febrile, hard, white, with which there is no pain and in which there is a cavity like the cavity of the sorrow of an owl; and therefore it is called by some "rizatz", i.e. pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in certain men, it is humid, which produces pus; and the humidity is so strong that it is abscised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is great, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And as I have said in the division, then when you consider the wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed nor is in bare flesh, is not this but for one of these nine causes: among which one is because there is a lack of blood in the body; or because it is caused by evil humor; or because between the wound and the lips is hard skin preventing the natural birth of flesh; or because it is too old; or because that ulcer within itself is putrid and the material sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient for healing it; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or by the property of the region such as occurs in Saragossa, where digestion of diseases is difficult and healing of abscesses is delayed due to natural causes; or because there is a bone or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And now all those causes and signs of them and their cures with medicines have been shown in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that you should know the cure of fistula which is made by way of operation with me.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for there are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the cord, or to the bowel, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints composed by composition such as the shoulder and hip; and those are which give proximity to the main member and its likenesses.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore that one of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the diseases of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is some fistula whose depth does not reach those places which I mentioned, and you wait and trust in the healing of it, and you want to come to a knowledge of it, then take a tenta of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows a straight line, and you will probe that with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle leaden tenta, for lead, with its lightness of body, is alleviated and curved to follow the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many frightful things, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with a tenta.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then clarify the opening by its openings, for the humidity which you use to clarify that goes through the other openings and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire with great subtlety, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula with many openings and situated above all on the sum of your strength, with your questioning, with your searching out the sick person, and the invention of pain due to your compression with your hand on the place, and likenesses of significations and causes accidental to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes with true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider now whether the fistula is apparent, nearby or in a salt-like place, distant from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, or one of the places which I mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you will cut off the fistula according to what was said before in the narration of it, and stop this which is in that filtration and corrupt flesh, and this which is born in the opening of the flesh, or in the vein and likenesses, and cure this until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight line, then you must insert it into the preon as far as possible for you, and properly remove all its corrupt flesh; and properly administer some enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And make this with that, making it into the cavity some times until the acute medicine corrodes all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that with emplasters which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you must cauterize that according to what we have recounted.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of fistula is bone and you are certain about that, then you must inquire into it and cut off that according to what we have recounted, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member such as we said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed to you and there is some corruption and blackness, then you must remove that until all the corruption is hosted out; and properly cure that with what is necessary for it to be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and produces pus just as it was, then you must know that you have not reached the total eradication of corruption; and therefore you uncover it further and make the reason of it and the purification of it with your utmost strength, and properly restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, good is; and otherwise, then you must know that that corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that case there is nothing to do but to leave it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to your advantage to attract that, then you must attract it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you must make the extraction of all those with great subtlety, and of none leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humors is contrary to you, and in their insertion there is no fear nor error, then you must insert those ligaments or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you do not have preparation to extract the bones of your time, then pause over the wound as it pains that wound, and leave that in until it is at the environment of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it may not be consolidated, and the section which you have inserted into your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	They had, if you fear, pause over it with a poultice soaked in rose oil, or a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will have been dissolved, and the bones are separated from their abstraction, and that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone like the bone of the hip or coccyx or similar to those, and what is corrupted on it is only the surface of it so much so that it is only the face of it, then you must remove that with a reamer so much so that it will be removed that blackness and corruption, and properly restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted on it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and insert all into the place where the corruption has occurred, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you this, that you encounter with a man in his own coccyx for which you pause it and exemplify and assist over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There is a young man of about thirty years old, to whom it happens that he has pain in his coccyx, and the parts inside are inflamed on the matter inside the body until the matter reaches the coccyx, and it is material of abscess with great abscess, and there is no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time was extended with that by the error of the doctors until the abscess burst forth, and a great abundance of matter poured out, and his cure was properly paused until the bone was fistulized, and they made son in it many openings through which all the pus and humors of the body flowed.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then a multitude of doctors cured him for about two years, and there was not in them wisdom but only in the art, until you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the bone of him and the matters that were flowing from it through many openings in his great body; and already the body of that man was entirely stabilized and the color of him was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced a probe into one of those openings and guided it to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I carefully examined all the openings and found that those reached their proper places in all parts of the bone.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I carefully cut and inserted myself into one of those openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and corrupted and denigrated; and already a part of the bone was corrupted within which had penetrated to the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I saw what was uncovered and prepared from the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I saw that it was not in the bone, but that corruption which had abscessed and prepared, and I had already removed it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I iterated and uncovered again over the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and found continued corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I saw that it was not in the corruption, but rather in the bone itself; and accordingly, I had to perforate again to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on the other occasion and did not cease to insert the small bone little by little particularly and perforated the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inserted around a palm's length from it, and that extracted with its own marrow, and accordingly, restored that with medicines, and it consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of that and section of that except for the disposition of the flesh of that and the scarcity of tolerance of that and fear of that of death, because that happened to him at all hours by superfluity of evacuation bad syncopation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore his healing is due to complete healing, and nothing is in the place of hard bone; and it has been done well the disposition of him within his body and returned to its virtue; and he has been converted to his own dispositions and did not cause any contrariety in walking or harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if it is a prominent bone in the body that has been traumatized, then you must cut off that according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch it to the extremity of that prominent bone; and command someone to extend it further; and pause that ligament when it is thicker than the first one; and properly bind that over the flesh that remains between the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you can draw the flesh to the parts left, and then uncover the flesh over the place which you want to suture so that the sutures do not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause fist or table left of the bone decently, because when you do this, it is not prohibited for the sutures to cut off the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the suturing be done on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone where corruption and does not appear to the sense, and perhaps another suturing will be forced again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, beforehand it is one continuous part with another, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you must uncover all the flesh; and properly pause fist left, and properly suture that from the first part where the corruption is to the point where the suturing of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the suturing should be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, you must incise that corrupted joint, and sew the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the ratio but in vain.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the breast of the arm or the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into the corruption and how it appears to you, and then open that up, and cleanse that according to any disposition that is possible for you, and with each attempt, rectify it as far as possible without causing harm to your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know what are the incisors and the saws to be used to incise these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety and greatness and smallness, and hardness and rarity; for which it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you must know that this operation signifies to you the species of instrument which you need; when in your case it is great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness of methods of diseases, for then you already have them by yourself what is convenient for each disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I now shape you in the end of this chapter with the number of instruments which you will pause with simple ones and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray is to be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and its points are to be shaped like the points of an astilegio.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not necessary to do anything else but with this ray, to be confounded the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma de razori major dels otros:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma de razori menor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma de razori lat:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma de serra autra decentment fayta:
Forma de lu:	Forma de lu:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Forma de razori autra subtil:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Forma de un autra inscissori:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, all the reasons we have said about razors, incisors, and saws apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incising extremities and bone sawing.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected by either intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or as you have medicated that corruption with those medicines and the cure has not been achieved, or sometimes the corruption will go away without any apparent cause, and then it is necessary to incise that member into which the corruption has entered, so that the malady may escape through that opening of death or evil that is greater than the damage done to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that to which it happens is that the member becomes black until it is cooked and the fire has consumed it, or it can be approached so closely that the blackness enters into that member that is like it and takes all the flesh; and thus you must incise it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if it is caused by the percussion of certain venomous causes, such as those of scorpion sea or viper or ratel and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you must incise that of the root of the finger, and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the armpit of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it spreads that far, then you must incise the arm up to the armpit in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond that and spreads around the armpit, then in that case it is the death of the malady; and to administer another cause other than this in treatment is quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when corruption spreads to the foot of the toe, then you must incise that into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the ankle of the foot, then you must incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the knee joint, then you must incise the camba into the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then it is not a cure but a dismissal, and leave the malady to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part where you wish to begin, and then stretch another ligament over the location; and extend one ligament to the parts behind, and extend another ligament to the parts ahead; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments as far apart as possible until all the flesh is exposed; and then proceed with incision or sawing.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a cloth be applied to all the parts so that the wound does not touch the location, and that the malady's injury is adjusted and apostema caution.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you must cauterize the location carefully, or pause and apply some powder that restrains the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the wounded member with a ligament in a way that is convenient, and cure it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that you try to find a man in his own foot, this accident which you and I have mentioned, which is when the blackness occurs in his foot with an adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption occurs first in his toe, and then spreads to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself so as to put the cure into the member with the intensity of his pain and adjustment, and he incised that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago, that corruption occurred in the toe of my hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and it pierced through my hand and caused that superfluity to resound above the hand of medicine, and thus the purification of his body was accomplished; and no longer did the superfluity rebound and began to go to another toe, until it reached the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to incise the hand of him, and I did not want to do so because I was waiting for the rebound of that superfluity, and rather I feared the incision of his hand to death, because the power of the malady was upon a precipice.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he left me, he returned to his land and told me that the man had prepared and incised his entire hand, and it was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except that it may be an aid to those who suffer from this disease, and that it may be a signification by which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of sinews and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When apostema occurs on some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus flows out from it, and leaves the location empty as if it were a vessel, and the covering that is above it is like fine cloth, and there is no further corruption, nor does it infect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called sinu, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged to the point that corruption invades some member, then it is called fistula and not sinu.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is that you incise that covering entirely, just as it is turned, and especially when it is subtletized and made like a cloth, and comfort yourself that it does not stick to the location by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you wait until the covering sticks and that corruption has not achieved its ultimate consequence, and on the covering has appeared a spot, then you cure it with a poultice.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinu, and then if it is great, and the arm that is from fetent odor, then poultice it with this Egyptian medicine which is made of oil, vinegar, and ziniar receiving equal parts, and be adjusted in a vessel, and be cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes soft and suitable for a gentle application.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it the water that is necessary and dissolve it with honey and water; and poultice it on the sinu, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that with great care; and do so for as many days until the sinu is purified and the stench is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some times it is poulticed with ash water when this medicine is not present; and it is that you take the ashes of vitis, and put them on top of the water; and then mix it well and poultice it on the sinu until you are convinced that the wound is clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then poultice it with honey and water mixed with ziniar crushed, and poultice it with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey that purifies and cleanses, and wine makes the wound adhere, and especially when there is superfluity of stipticity and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are convinced that the wound is removed, then poultice it with water that makes the flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take from the dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil and stiptic vinegar; or that you poultice with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the wound is narrow and does not receive the poultice canula, then you enlarge it gradually with a small iron tool, and pause in it a wrapped cloth made of Egyptian ointment or Basilican ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the edges of it with a suture and leave just enough space for the poultice to be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the wound from which the flesh flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it at the lower part that is in it so that the flesh may flow downwards, for when the flesh is constricted in the abundance of sinu, the skin will be generated.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinu within the environs of the bone at the lower part according to your will, then you must force yourself to prepare the member with preparation for which the flesh flows slowly according to your arrangement and that there be no cause in it for the flesh.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are placed over the sinu in a way that is pleasing to you, and extend those over a cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity that it covers the entire sinu; and then incise with scissors at the right side of the orifice of the sinu, a track a little wider than the orifice of the sinu; and then extend over another cloth of linen the leon's ointment according to the length of the track, and place it so that the position is distant from the orifice of the sinu, so that the flow of the brac may be facilitated and not obstructed, but rather allow the cloth to remain for a few days at a time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is on the orifice of the sinu, which you should leave in all the time for fear that it may ignite what is adjusted within the flesh.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the flesh is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And now you should consider the place of that sinu, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an apostema.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medicine is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is discharged over the orifice of the sinu already adhering, or almost adherent, then leave it alone for 3 days, and when you remove the dressing, change the cloth to another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinu gives off a subtle space, then do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it is approaching, for some people in whom the tardy generation of flesh occurs in their wounds, and from those who are contrary to it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinu is not adherent after many days, and the brac remains indigest, then you should know that the sinu does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinu is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust to desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry just like the enguent dyafinicon, when it is adjusted with an excess of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most important thing of all is that which is cured, namely, to take enguent dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and then pour it over the wound, so that the old flesh is equalized in its substance, and then comfort yourself with it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work in that action, when there is no brac, to take enguent dyafinicon and honey, and to mix them together so that they become thickened, and use it; or to take mirra and aloen and gall, and to grind all of it into a powder and sprinkle it over the honey which has been heated until it becomes thickened, and then line it with this mixture on cloth and strengthen it over the sinu; and line it with the honey which you have mixed together so that it becomes thickened, and sprinkle it over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some times administer Aristologia longa and Razitz of lili celesti (and it is lili celesti) and farina of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, grind them and powderize them over the honey which has been recounted; and then use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinu is prolonged and does not heal through this cure, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already inquiry is being made in the bones or other hard members or joints; then you should treat it with fistular cure, just as above is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	The treatment for paronychia and fingernail irritation caused by abrasion and digit incision added, as well as sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that leaves behind the nail of the finger or toe and strongly attacks the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is more precious, either it becomes apostematized by another apostema, or it becomes corrupted, and pours brac into what corrodes the root of the nail, and strongly corrupts all of that, and strongly spreads its corruption to the bone, so that it becomes a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe is made dark, and the color of it becomes made fusca.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore, when you have done what we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you incise with a sharp instrument all the superfluous matter that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound properly over water, because cauterization is very helpful in this way.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions to the nail have already filled up the spaces within, and begin to pierce and lead that flesh away, then it is necessary that you pause a fine ray beneath the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it up and cut through that flesh with ease, and pause over what remains of the flesh with medicines that cause corrosion until all is removed; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corrosion and corruption go into the digit, then you should incise it in one of the joints according to the precept of its remembrance, and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail becomes percussive or atritic, and becomes inflamed in that place with a violent pain, then it is necessary that you first fleubotomize the malady, and then dry up the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section above and below, and be careful not to cut too deeply into the skin left behind the nail, for you will cause the malady's violent pain to become even worse, and it will lead to the nativity of superfluous flesh in that place; and then cure that place with what brings relief from the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But this adjustment, which is natural in many men, strongly attacks the flesh, and strongly settles in the bones, or strongly settles in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the nativity of them in certain joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But what is born in some joints of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born in the joints strongly hurts.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And among those that are born with fleshiness, the section is light, and it is that you should incise the root of it with a blunt spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful not to make an abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in those that are born with digits, it is necessary to incise the joints; and then you should first cut away the flesh from there with an incision round and deep into the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for this purpose, and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which occurs in the fingers between their joints sometimes or by nativity of the man who has it, or by consolidation of wound or by combustion of fire, or by similar causes; then it is necessary to remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between their wraps of linen and oil scented with rose for so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them, or pause between them a thin plate of lead until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you should cut away that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions, there are various types.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are thus varicas, and so are veins wrapped in thick fatty tissue, full of melancholic superfluities that come to swell the limbs of the body, and most notably in the thighs, and especially in the thighs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body with black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then let the patient's blood flow from the Basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure for them is done with iron in two ways: one way is to incise and attract that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is done in this way: first, grasp the thigh with cold water to resolve the thick blood that is clogged in the vein, and then strengthen the thigh of the patient at the superior part of the groin to the lower part of the navel with a bandage, and then cut open the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and then elevate the black blood with the help of the partition of the thigh up into its own place, and from there down to the bottom, until the amount of blood that you want and that is necessary for the patient's health has been taken away, and which takes away the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then he (the doctor) will say that and command him (the patient) to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And then iterates on the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and he notices that the patient is suffering.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is done in this way: you will grasp the thigh of the patient if it is swollen and put it in a warm bath and then grasp the thigh with cold water until it becomes red and the veins are expanded; or if there is no bath, exercise it strongly so that the member is warmed up.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then you will cut the cord in the right side of the vein by sectioning it in the length or at the end of it, or at the lowest part of it, or at the top.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then you will open the cord with an incision and excise the vein entirely until it appears to the sense, and then it is necessary for the patient to recognize that sometimes that vein requests descent into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus, as you remove the cord and then take out that white thing which is called a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you will put that thing down and place the thread in such a way that it is elevated and cast off from the cord, and suspend it with one ounce of lead.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then you will make another cut, right next to the previous one, for three fingers' width, and you will excise the cord from the part above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then you will elevate it and incise it in the rear section of the tusk, and then extract it and elevate it until it is issued through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then you will place it in such a way that you extract the tissue from the section that is the highest or most superior of all the sections, until everything is issued; and afterwards, make an incision on it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it there, or insert the thread below and turn your hand around until it is pulled out.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will become difficult for you to elevate that part and will bring harm to the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when that part is entirely removed, then pause over the location of the wound, submerged in wine and rose-scented oil and unrosed oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is constricted because of twisting and turning to the extent that it wraps around the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then you must cut on all sides of the twisting and turning of the part, and suspend it with an incision until you elevate the entire thing.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that your section should not cut the vein and should not plague it, for if you do, it will be difficult for you to elevate that thing; and exercise your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the wound that has been cut with a sword.
Forma de unci orp:	The shape of an ounce of lead.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not like that, nor is it a sharp point or edge, for if it were, it would cut the vein with its subtlety. Instead, it has a coarse flexibility, so that if it were too fine, it would cut the vein because of its fineness. And it is in this superfluous thickness, as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the saphenous vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs, in the lower parts of the land, just as Al-Ateji described it in the land of the Arabs and in the dry and arid lands of India, where there is little vegetation or water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body beyond the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the generation of it is from putridity that remains behind the cord, just as venom flows out of the body through serpents and worms and scorpions and worms that are generated between the cord and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of its susceptibility to the coming forth of it is that this vein becomes inflamed in the thigh with great heat; and at that location, a vesicle forms; and from that vesicle, the vein begins to issue forth like a plant sprouting.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when his extremity appears, you should wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is one and two-thirds drachmae, tie it up and let the lead hang from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And whenever you notice some cause at the parts outside, envelop it in lead and compress it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you must incise a part of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut that part to the root until it has been completely removed, for if you cut it too soon, it will be constricted and enter into the flesh, causing apostema and pyemia in the location and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it little by little, until it is completely removed from the body, without leaving any cause or residue behind.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it has been seen in some men who are its full length of 20 palms and above. And I have already seen one that measures 30 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then you must insert the thread into the track of the vein and perforate it with a long track through the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and afterwards, care for it by curing apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and comes to me with many orifices, and is connected to each orifice branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore care for this vein just as we have said in the division, and also according to what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the sectioning of worms generated under the skin and it is called Bovine Distress.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called "bovine disease" in some lands because many times it affects the cows and there are very few worms that are born between the cord and the flesh, and they go up and down throughout the body, and are manifested by a sensation of numbness from member to member until they break the cord and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is through putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms and serpents and earthworms and ascariids are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of the evil of it, for when it goes to the heart and is elevated to the head, and is brought to the throat, then it is very strong in it and enters and destroys the throat, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then you must not proceed unless you have first made the necessary preparations and appearance of it in the sensation, and accordingly you should strengthen what is above it and what is left below it with a strong constriction, and afterwards dry out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is inflamed in the flesh and you do not treat it, then you must pause cauterization with fire over the location until it dies, and the greatest fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the location just as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you reach the location where it is about to emerge from the throat, then strengthen above the skin with a strong constriction, and afterwards dry out and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient uses purification of their body through medicines evacuating bad humors, and guard against foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the sectioning of Naphar's illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called Naphar in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members of the body, and it is spread from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen it according to what you told me.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You went to visit a sick woman in a village, and you saw her arm and noticed a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after staying for an hour, I saw that inflammation rise like a worm going up this way, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it flows from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I went to the pain in that location and found myself in the muscle, and afterwards stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And afterwards it went into another body, until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And afterwards I was told that it [the pain] turned itself around the entire body, just as you saw; and I was very amazed at the transformation of it and the speed with which it moved from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And you had already seen this in my own veins according to that manner, however, I have seen many others who have found pain being transformed from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in the same way as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you do not think it is this way except that it is because the woman was old, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this appearance the sensation of that transformation appears.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that there does not appear this same retro-cure in those who are delicate and have moist skin and veins narrowed.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then you should not appear at the throat as we have said, but instead you strengthen over that location and leave it slightly and dryly on that place until that bound ventosity is released, and then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not reach it through the usual channels (los tieus huels), then you cure that location by excision of the body and with what expels ventosities, and charm those places with fetid pills and with pills of serepia and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of Sageta's.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagetas are diversified according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they are found, because their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, and these are solid ones; and there are those that have three angles, and those that have tongues; and there are those that have astels.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the one that is according to the members and the places where it is found is according to two methods: because the members or are principal concave ones, like the brain, heart, and liver, and lung, and trachea, and bladder, and kidney, and its semblances; and therefore when you find it in some of these members and appear to you signs of death, then you must tell me to avoid extracting that sageta from those where death is certain in the one who is in the major disposition, and when you do not appear to have those bad signs, and the sageta is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the cervel is when it finds the sageta and passes through the bone, and comes out from the cyphac which is above the brain, because accidents occur by this hot soda, scotomia, vertigo, trembling in the hands, inflammation and trembling of the tongue, spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of gall, and very little is spoken and destroyed is the voice, and it comes out from the place of the wound a white humidification like powder, and eyes that seem similar to the quality of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the sageta, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the sageta when it is in the heart are that it is near the left breast and feels hard, like a stone, and is not soft; and very little is its movement similar to the movement of the pulse, and blood flows from the wound with black blood, and there is heat in the extremities, and sweat, and faintness; and therefore know that death descends slowly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the sageta has pierced the lung, the signs are: blood foams from the wound, and the vessels that are near the collarbone are inflamed, and the patient's complexion has changed, and he expires with great breathlessness, and demands a draft of cool air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the sageta is in the vein that is in the feet, and the pain is near the little bones of the feet, it makes a great deal of noise with a vehement pain and sighing, and none of the members of the muscles are moved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the sageta is in the stomach, then very little will come out from the wound as some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the sageta is in the abdomen and is fixed there, it will produce some rent or tear in the wound, or the membrane, or the bladder which is disrupted, and there is no hope for the cure of the wound by extracting the sageta.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the sageta is in the bladder and it comes out with urine, and processes some cause to the outside parts, and very little is pain on the patient, then you should know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members such as the face, neck, and shoulder blade, and the vertebrae and the auxiliary bones, and the ribs of the back, and the pelvis, and the femur and their likenesses in the members are saved according to the major dispositions when the sageta does not reach a vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend this to you, that I have seen the being of these sagetas, for what signifies by this on the cure thereof.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is because in one man the sageta was lodged in the lacrimal duct of the eye socket at the base of the nose, and I extracted it from there to the other side, leaving the gray matter of the ear intact, and he recovered, and did not suffer any harm in the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another sageta from a Jew, which was lodged in the gray matter of his eye socket, leaving just below the eyelid and above. The sageta had already been hidden and it wasn't possible to get more than a small part of it with the instrument that had no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is satisfied, and did not suffer any harm in his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another sageta from a Christian man who had it lodged in his shoulder blade (golayro), and it was an Arab sageta, and it was the one with ears; and then I cut open above it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the shoulder blade of him; and then I carefully extracted it, and the Christian man recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another sageta from a man who had it lodged in his abdomen (ventre), and thought that he would die because of it; and therefore, after waiting 30 days and there was no change in his condition or disposition, I cut open above the sageta and manipulated it beneath, and he recovered, and did not suffer any harm or accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom was lodged a sageta in his back (dos), and the wound had become consolidated over it, and after seven years, I extracted the sageta from the base of the spine.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom was lodged a sageta in her abdomen (ventre), and the wound had become consolidated inside it, and there had been no change in her natural functions or movements, and the woman did not suffer any harm or discomfort from her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom was lodged a sageta in his face (cara), and the wound had become consolidated and the sageta had remained intact, without causing any great pain or similar symptoms.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the sageta from the nose of the king's prince who had it lodged in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side by a little bit, and the entire sageta was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was summoned to the cure of him within three days after the insertion of the sageta.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I probed the wound of the sageta very gently; and then I asked him with a subtle question, and he did not sense it; but he felt a prickling sensation below the right ear, and then I suspected that this prickling was due to the extremity of the sageta.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the ointment to the location where virtue is attractive and digestive, supposing that the location was inflamed because it appeared to me as if the location of the sageta was becoming inflamed, so that it would heal over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident in the location that the sageta had reached, and I continued to apply the ointment over it for many days and there was no accident; and the wound became consolidated in the meantime, and the patient's condition improved gradually over the space of many days until one day he felt the sageta inside his nose and recognized it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied the acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it was fully open, and with the attempt I gently probed the extremity of the sageta, which was attached to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted in the application of the medicine to the wound for that which appeared to me visibly the extremity of the sageta, and I passed the time with it over the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then since the wound had become more inflamed, it became possible for me to enter with forceps into it, and I removed the sageta, and did not pay attention to its surroundings, as I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously work on it with various instruments of ingenuity, until one day I began to take it out with descending forceps, according to the form that would come at the end of this chapter, and then I extracted it; and then restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and I restored it, and the wound is consolidated, and the patient's health is completely restored, and there is no need for any further treatment.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some sagerias, because it is necessary for this rule and meaning on that which I have not said, since the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood by narration nor comprehend those free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled craftsmen (artifexs) are aware that there is little information available on this subject, and that what is present about something is also absent; and they find a new operation and novel instrument necessary for the descent of extraneous causes from the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore, I say that sageritas are not expelled from the members in which they are lodged except by two methods: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the contrary of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled through the place into which it enters, or is a sagerita proceeding from a fleshly location, and is attracted and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the summons of the hour in which it is caught, then it must be left alone for some days until the flesh that surrounds it becomes soft and relaxed, and the attraction to it and its egress are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your summons, then leave it alone for some days and gently coax it with attraction and motion each day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your summons after some days, then you must pierce the circle of the sagerita in that bone on all sides with a subtle taravel until the location is amplified by the sagerita, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the sagerita is fixed in the bone of the skull and has proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in some patient with certain of those accidents which I have mentioned, then leave off from the extraction of the sagerita and let it remain for a certain number of days; because if the sagerita reaches the ciphac (the highest part of the skull), then death is not prolonged to that person.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the sagerita is not fixed in the bone of the skull, but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the ciphac (the highest part of the skull), and the patient remains ill for a certain number of days, and no accident occurs due to any of those accidents, then you must engage in the attraction of the sagerita and its egress.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is fixed and does not obey your summons for extraction, then you must administer taravels in the circle of the sagerita as we have previously recommended, and carefully care for the location until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the sagerita has already been hidden in the location of the body and is hidden from the senses, then you must inquire about it with all tentativeness, and if you feel it, then draw it out with certain instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot work on it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the preon, and here there is no bone or nerve or vein, then you must feel around the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the sagerita.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the means with which to hold it, then you must deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from all sides with all the skill that you can muster; and ingenia on this, if you cannot on the evulsion of the flesh at the fracture of the ears and the twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the sagerita in each location where it is, then you must use with twisting of your hand and forceps on all sides until it obeys; and subtlely with subtle subtlety that the sagerita is not broken and that it is made easy to your difficult attraction to it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot act on that of your time, then you must leave for some days until the parts in the circle of it are softened, and then iterate, for when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you find that there is a contrary flow of blood, then you must administer the water that we have spoken of in our chapter on healing.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of inscribing veins or nerves, or cord, and administer skill in all manner possible to the extraction of the sagerita; and do this with facility, tranquility, slowness, and firmness, just as you and I have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus, as you make the sagerita contract by its own power, for then the patient will be according to the figure in which the fire should cause the settling of the sagerita in it, for it is more justifiable.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not to your ability, then you must administer what is to your ability according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the sageritas that are outside-located by the contrary of the other part, or which already process some part to the outer parts, or make gelatinousness the extremity of the sagerita by sentiment of the part above the code and sometimes it is eminent; therefore you must cease on that; and be the cessation according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and thus attract it, for it is made easy to being drawn.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you must twist the limb according to contrary motion until the sagerita presses into the bone, and amplify as it meets, and thus extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for some days, and then iterate on it until it is ready.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the root of the sagerita is in that place, then you must propel it with force.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the root is fallen and you must administer an impulse, then you must introduce it into that place, if it is deaf, make a hollow sound so that it enters the concavity of the force in the tail of the sagerita and thus propel it with force.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the sagerita is concave, then you must propel it with a strong sound entering into that place, for the sagerita is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the sagerita is entwined, then you must uncover what lies beneath, all the flesh in which it is veiled, if that is possible for you, and thus care for it with what is needed.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the sagerita settles in the feet, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is near enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is to your ability to cease on it, then cease on it and take care not to inscribe vein or nerve, and extract it, and thus close the wound if needed, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	I think I can help you with that!
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Another interesting passage!
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Another interesting passage!
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Another interesting passage!
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Another interesting passage!
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Another interesting passage!
De fleubotomia de las venas.	It looks like we're moving on to a new topic!
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	It looks like we're getting more specific about the type of veins being discussed! It looks like we're getting more specific about the type of veins being discussed! It looks like we're getting into the details of the veins!
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	It looks like we're getting down to business! It looks like we're getting into the details of the veins and their characteristics!
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	It looks like we're getting into the details of the veins in the leg!
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical practices!
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of wound care!
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical practices!
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of wound care!
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of book structure!
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical decision-making!
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical observation!
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of surgical procedures!
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical remedies!
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical observation!
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical procedures!
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical techniques!
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique again!
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical subtlety!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis and treatment!
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical decision-making!
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical observation!
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical care!
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical problem-solving!
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis!
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical challenges!
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical anatomy!
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical application!
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical precision!
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis!
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical reflection!
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical wisdom!
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical timing!
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical pragmatism!
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical age-related considerations!
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical preparation for bleeding (fleubotomia)!
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical contraindications!
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnostics!
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical decision-making!
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical timing!
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical caution!
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical treatment!
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical procedure!
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical diagnosis and treatment!
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical treatment!
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	It looks like we're getting into the realm of medical technique!
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	It looks like we're getting to the conclusion of this medical text!
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	It looks like we're getting to the final instructions on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of this medical text!
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to perform a bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It looks like we're getting to the final conclusion of this medical text!
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	It looks like we're getting to the final conclusion of this medical text!
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to handle a severe bleeding procedure (fleubotomia)!
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It looks like we've reached the final sentence of this medical text!
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	It looks like we're getting to the final advice on how to handle a situation where there is still some bleeding or discoloration at the wound site.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The final sentence!
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	The final sentence!
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The final sentence!
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	The final sentence!
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	The final sentence!
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	The final sentence!
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	The final sentence!
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The final sentence!
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	The final sentence!
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	The final sentence!
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	The final sentence!
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	The final sentence!
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	The final sentence!
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	The final sentence!
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	The final sentence!
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	The final sentence!
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	The final sentence!
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	The final sentence!
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The final sentence!
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	The final sentence!
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	The final sentence!
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The final sentence!
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The final sentence!
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The final sentence!
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	The final sentence!
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	The final sentence!
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The final sentence!
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The final sentence!
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	The final sentence!
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	The final sentence!
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	The final sentence!
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The final sentence!
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	The final sentence!
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The final sentence!
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	The final sentence!
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	The final sentence!
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	The final sentence!
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	The final sentence!
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	The final sentence!
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	The final sentence!
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	The final sentence!
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The final sentence!
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The final sentence!
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	The final sentence!
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	The final sentence!
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	The final sentence!
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	The final sentence!
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	It looks like we've reached the end of the text!
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	It looks like we're diving into a new section!
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	It looks like we're diving deeper into the topic of breathing exercises!
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	It looks like we're diving even deeper into the topic of ventilation!
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	It looks like we're diving into a list of specific locations on the body where scarification and blood extraction (ventozacio) is performed!
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	It looks like we're wrapping up the text!
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	It looks like we're wrapping up the text with some practical advice!
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	It looks like we're diving into the causes of certain physical and mental symptoms!
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	It looks like we're wrapping up the text with some practical advice!
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	It looks like we're discussing the benefits of ventilation (ventozacio) in the neck area!
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	It looks like we're discussing the location of the ventozacio (ventilation) in relation to the fleubotomia (bleeding) procedure!
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of using a proper instrument for bleeding (fleubotomia)!
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of not using a certain instrument on the elderly or those with certain medical conditions!
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of not forgetting (oblivio) and the need to command the person performing the ventilation (ventozador) to be careful!
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	It looks like we're discussing the location of ventozacio (ventilation) in relation to fleubotomia (bleeding)!
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of not over-ventilating (enpellida) in the alkehel region!
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventozacio (ventilation) in the alhagdahan region!
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique when performing ventilation (ventozacio)!
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozacio) on the mouth and gums!
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozacio) on the body!
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventosacio) on the blood vessels!
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique when performing ventilation (ventozacio) and scarification!
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozacio) on certain parts of the body!
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique when performing ventilation (ventozacio)!
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozas) on various parts of the body!
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of ventilation (ventozas) on the heart and blood vessels!
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	It looks like we're discussing the relationship between different types of ventilation (ventozas)!
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper positioning and timing when performing ventilation (ventozas)!
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of continuous effort when performing ventilation (ventozas)!
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification and suction (scarifiqua e itera)!
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of moderation when performing scarification (scarifiques)!
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificacio) and suction (succio)!
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificiques) and its effects on blood flow!
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificiques) and its effects on blood extraction!
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	It looks like we're discussing the process of scarification (scarificacio) and its effects on blood flow!
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	It looks like we're discussing the process of extracting blood (sanc) and the role of scarification (scarificacio) in achieving this goal!
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	It looks like we're discussing the process of extracting blood (sanc) and the role of scarification (scarificacio) in achieving this goal!
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	It looks like we're discussing the depth of scarification (codena)!
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	It looks like we're discussing the properties of different oils (olis) and their effects on the skin!
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	It looks like we're discussing the properties of different oils (olis) and their effects on the skin!
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	It looks like we're discussing the properties of different water sources (ayguaros) and their effects on the skin!
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	It looks like we're discussing the properties of different water sources (vi agre) and their effects on the skin!
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	It looks like we're discussing the properties of different water sources (vi antic) and their effects on the skin!
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper ventilation (ventozacio) and its relationship to bathing (bahn)!
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	A Latin phrase!
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of considering one's emotions and physical state before performing certain actions!
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of taking breaks and nourishing one's body!
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of moderation in one's diet and habits!
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper hydration during certain medical procedures!
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper hydration and medication during certain medical procedures!
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper placement of scars (scarificacio)!
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of proper technique in scarification (scarificacio) and its effects on the body!
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of scarification (scarificacio) on certain medical conditions!
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of scarification (scarificacio) on the liver and skin!
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	It looks like we're discussing the administration of certain medicines!
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	It looks like we're discussing the administration of certain medicines in the treatment of skin conditions!
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine administered by fire!
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	It looks like we're discussing the preparation of a certain medicine!
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	It looks like we're discussing differences in medicine preparations!
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	It looks like we're discussing the proper way to administer a certain medicine!
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	It looks like we're discussing the proper way to administer a certain medicine!
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	It looks like we're discussing the proper way to handle a certain type of candle!
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	It looks like we're discussing the administration of a certain medicine!
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	It looks like we're discussing the characteristics of this medicine!
Capitol .xcvii.	It looks like we're reaching the end of the text!
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	It looks like we're discussing the administration of certain medicines!
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	It looks like we're discussing the quality of using certain medicines!
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	It looks like we're discussing the proper way to administer certain medicines!
E cum son umplidas e caso.	It looks like we're reaching the end of the text!
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	It looks like we're discussing the effects of a certain medicine!
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	It looks like we're discussing how to prepare and administer a certain medicine!
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	It looks like we're discussing how to treat a certain medical condition!
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	It looks like we're discussing how to treat a condition where blood is multiplied or excessive!
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	It looks like we're discussing the use of leeches (sanguissuguas) in medicine!
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	It looks like we're discussing the use of leeches (sanguissuguas) in medicine!
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	It looks like we're discussing how to treat certain medical conditions!
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	It looks like we're reaching the final part of this medical treatise!
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	It looks like we're discussing the importance of this chapter in the field of medicine!
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	It looks like we're being addressed by the author, who is warning us about the importance of this chapter!
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	It looks like we're getting to the root of the matter!
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	It looks like we're coming to the end of the author's journey!
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	It looks like we're reaching the end of the author's writing!
Capitol primier.	We're back at the beginning!
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	We're starting a new chapter!
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	We're starting the introduction to this chapter!
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	We're getting into the meat of the chapter!
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	The author is getting specific about diet!
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	The author is wrapping things up!
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	The author is providing specific dietary advice!
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The author is highlighting the importance of bone health in older age!
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	The author is emphasizing the importance of bone health in older age!
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The author is discussing the natural processes that occur in the body!
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	The author is emphasizing the importance of dietary changes!
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The author is highlighting the importance of understanding the different types of fractures!
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The author is highlighting the diversity of fractures based on the different parts of the body!
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	The author is concluding the discussion of fractures!
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The author is concluding the discussion of fractures!
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The author is describing the various types of fractures that can occur in different parts of the body!
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The author is concluding the discussion of fractures!
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	The author is providing a summary or key to fractures!
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The author is describing the characteristic signs of a fracture!
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	The author is providing a cautionary note about diagnosing fractures!
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	The author is cautioning against premature diagnosis and recommending a more nuanced approach to diagnosing fractures!
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The author is describing the importance of careful observation and diagnosis in determining the extent of a fracture!
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat an abscess that has developed cautiously!
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The author is highlighting the relative ease of treating fractures in soft tissues compared to those in bones!
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	The author is concluding the discussion by emphasizing the importance of remembering previous experiences!
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in the arm or leg!
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in the arm or leg!
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	The author is emphasizing the importance of caution and gentle care when treating fractures!
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	The author is emphasizing the importance of taking advantage of opportunities and making adjustments as needed!
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	The author is warning against excessive stretching and compressing, as well as the careless actions of foolish surgeons who can cause abscesses or contractions!
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and ensure proper healing!
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The author is concluding the discussion by emphasizing the importance of understanding the quality of the member's structure and its relationship to the fracture.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in small bones or limbs!
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures in larger bones or limbs!
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat fractures and apply wraps!
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The author is providing guidance on how to shape the star-shaped wraps!
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	The author is providing guidance on how to shape the star-shaped wraps and apply them to the fracture!
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The author is providing guidance on the thickness and quality of the threads used in the wrap!
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	The author is providing guidance on the importance of using subtle threads in the wrap!
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The author is providing guidance on how to treat the patient's extremities (hands or feet) if they are affected by the wraps!
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	The author is referring to some fractures that are accompanied by a wound (plague) and subsequent disruption in the continuity of the bone (disruption in the codeina), and how one should come up with a plan for treatment based on individuality.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	The author is cautioning that not all broken bones (trençats) are suitable for wrapping with stars on the first day. The reason is that when the bone is large, it's better to wait 7-10 days or more before applying wraps, depending on the risk of developing an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	The author is describing the method used by the Ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains using a type of plaster (emplaustre).
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The author is describing the method of applying plaster (emplaustre) to treat fractures, which is suitable for many complexions and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or cold on the skin.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	The author is describing the process of preparing the plaster (emplaustre) and applying it to the skin.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plasters to restore fractures and dislocations and torsions: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is the root of saved sage, one and two-thirds drachmae; of myrrh and aloes, one and five drachmae; of alochil, twenty drachmae; all should be ground and sifted and mixed with water or album of hou or if the patient's complexion is scalded; and then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and cures many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for plaster which cures fractures and torsions: recipe of myrrh and white alum, one and two-thirds drachmae; of myrrh and aloes, one and five drachmae; of acacia, six drachmae; of Armenian balm, twenty drachmae.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The final sentence!
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	The final recipe!
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	The final statement!
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another recipe for plaster!
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Another shortened method for making plaster! The final instruction!
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	The final note!
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plastering!
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	A final note from Hippocrates!
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A final note from Gualia!
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Another recipe for plaster!
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	A final note on the quantity of plaster!
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	A final warning!
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	A final step in the treatment process!
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	The final instruction!
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	The final note!
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	The final instruction! The final note!
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The final instruction!
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	The final instruction!
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	The final warning!
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	The final statement!
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	We're moving on to a new chapter!
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The different types of fractures!
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The different types of wounds and their causes!
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	The different types of fractures and their wounds!
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	The fracture that is hidden within the bone!
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	The fracture that is caused by falling or percussion!
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The majority of fractures occur in humans!
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	The different types of fractures are like stars separated!
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	The final phrase!
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	The final statement!
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The final sentence!
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	The importance of considering the patient's symptoms in fracture treatment!
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	The importance of treating underlying conditions before expecting a cure!
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The importance of studying the symptoms and signs before starting treatment!
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	The importance of considering the season and the condition of the bone when starting treatment!
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	The importance of considering the location and extent of the fracture when starting treatment!
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	The importance of carefully examining the patient's head and neck!
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	The importance of detecting the extent of the injury and taking appropriate action!
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	The mention of two different surgical approaches!
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The description of two different surgical approaches!
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	The importance of using the right tool for the job!
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	The importance of having a variety of instruments and being able to adapt to different situations!
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	The importance of using instruments with ease and precision!
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	The importance of being cautious when working with dense or hard bone!
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The importance of carefully considering the shape and size of the bone when performing surgery!
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	The importance of having a variety of instruments with different shapes and sizes to suit the unique characteristics of each bone!
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	The description of the three species of taravels and their characteristics!
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	The importance of carefully removing bone fragments and using precision instruments to achieve the desired outcome!
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	The importance of exercising caution when using instruments to avoid causing harm or damage!
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	The importance of carefully extracting bone fragments and reassembling them in their correct position!
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	The importance of carefully handling and repairing small bone fragments!
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The description of the second surgical method!
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The description of the lenticular and acute parts of the bone!
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	The importance of carefully and gently handling the bone fragments!
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	The importance of carefully removing any attached cause or fragment from the bone!
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	The importance of carefully shaping and smoothing the bone fragments to ensure proper alignment!
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	The importance of carefully shaping and smoothing the bone fragments to ensure proper alignment!
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	The importance of carefully treating and correcting small bone fractures!
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	The cause why it is not understood by all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The conclusion that we have shown in great fractures!
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	The importance of carefully dressing and treating wounds!
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	The importance of carefully monitoring and treating wounds!
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	The importance of using powdered medicine to treat wounds!
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	The importance of keeping the wound clean and free from infection!
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	The consequences of neglecting the wound and allowing infection to spread!
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	The use of medicine to treat the wound and prevent infection! The application of medicine and the use of species of cure!
Capitol .iii.	The beginning of a new chapter!
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	The art of repairing a broken nose!
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	The anatomy of the nose and the importance of preserving its structure!
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	The art of setting a broken nose!
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	The importance of taking care when performing surgery!
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	The technique for setting a broken nose when the fracture is in the upper part of the nose!
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	The technique for setting a broken nose when the fracture is in two parts!
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	The importance of early intervention and rest in the recovery process!
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	The technique for applying a nasal splint to set a broken nose!
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	The importance of using the right materials and techniques to set a broken nose!
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	The use of a different material to set a broken nose!
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	The flexibility to choose between two options!
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	The use of various substances to treat infection!
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	The use of natural remedies to treat infection and promote healing!
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	The importance of treating fractures and promoting healing!
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	The treatment of nasal wounds and the use of lead canules!
Capitol .iiii.	The beginning of a new chapter!
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	The art of repairing a broken jaw!
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	The importance of carefully assessing the extent of the fracture!
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	The technique for setting a broken jawbone!
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	The importance of repositioning and stabilizing a broken jawbone!
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	The technique for repairing and stabilizing a broken jawbone with loose teeth!
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	The importance of rest and relaxation in the recovery process!
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	The technique for correcting and stabilizing the jawbone!
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	The importance of patience and allowing the fracture to heal naturally!
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	The use of previously discussed remedies to treat infection and promote healing!
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	The importance of assessing the severity of a broken bone with an accompanying wound!
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	The technique for enlarging the opening of a wound to facilitate drainage!
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	The importance of dressing and protecting the wound to promote healing!
Capitol .v.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	The art of repairing a broken sternum!
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The different ways a broken sternum can occur!
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The different types of sternum fractures and their implications for treatment!
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	The importance of having two assistants during surgery!
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	The importance of carefully aligning the fracture to achieve proper form!
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	The importance of stretching and elevating the sternum to achieve proper alignment!
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	The importance of using a reclining position to facilitate proper alignment!
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The importance of using assistants to elevate the sternum and facilitate proper alignment!
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	The importance of removing fragments from the sternum!
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The technique for removing fragments from the sternum!
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	The description of the tool used to remove fragments from the sternum!
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The importance of adjusting the tool's length during surgery!
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	The importance of closing the wound with sutures!
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	The importance of dressing and covering the wound!
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	The use of a dressing to promote healing and prevent infection!
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The use of a specialized dressing and splint to promote healing and stability!
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	The importance of monitoring the patient's progress and adjusting the splint as needed!
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The importance of proper positioning and elevation during sleep!
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	The importance of monitoring and adjusting the splint as needed!
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	The importance of updating the dressing and splint as needed!
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	The expected recovery time and variability in healing!
Capitol .vi.	The end of the first chapter!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The second chapter!
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A detailed description of the fracture!
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	The importance of careful preparation and reduction!
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	The use of various materials to promote healing!
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	The importance of shaping the slate to fit the contours of the shoulder!
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	The importance of securing the slate and preventing it from shifting!
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	The importance of monitoring and adjusting the dressing!
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	The importance of keeping the patient comfortable and stable!
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The expected recovery time!
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	The importance of carefully monitoring the dressing and knowing when to remove it!
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The importance of monitoring for signs of infection and taking action if necessary!
Capitol .vii.	The start of a new chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	The treatment of a fractured foot!
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	A detailed description of the fracture!
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	The symptoms of a severely broken foot!
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The process of restoring the foot to its normal shape!
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The process of applying the dressing and splint to the broken foot!
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	The importance of monitoring and adjusting the dressing and splint to ensure proper healing!
Capitol .viii.	The start of a new chapter!
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	The repair of fractured ribs!
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	The importance of recognizing the location and nature of rib fractures!
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The importance of recognizing the signs and symptoms of rib fractures!
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The importance of proper treatment and care for rib fractures!
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	The consequences of not treating rib fractures properly!
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ancient wisdom!
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	The importance of proper nutrition and care for rib fractures!
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	The importance of being cautious and prepared for potential complications!
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	The importance of taking precautions against infection!
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	The importance of covering the wound with lanolin and applying poultices!
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	The importance of taking decisive action to treat the patient!
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	The importance of closing the wound and applying dressings to promote healing!
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	The treatment of internal infection!
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	The final stage of treatment: recovery!
Capitol .ix.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	The repair of spinal fractures!
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	The description of spinal fractures!
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	The diagnosis of spinal fractures!
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	The sign of recovery!
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	The importance of observing and weighing the patient's condition!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	The gravity of the situation!
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	The power of natural remedies!
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of internal infection!
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	The importance of rest and relaxation in recovery!
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	The treatment of bone fractures!
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	The treatment of bone fractures!
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	The treatment of broken bones!
Capitol .x.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de la ancha.	The repair of a wide wound!
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The description of a wide wound!
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The treatment of a wide wound!
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	The alignment of a fractured bone!
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	The treatment of a fracture in the long bone!
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	The application of a dressing!
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The alignment of the cavity!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	The treatment of an internal infection!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	The treatment of fractured bones!
Capitol .xi.	The next chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	The repair of a fractured arm!
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The arm!
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	The treatment of a broken arm!
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The application of splints!
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The treatment of a broken arm!
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	The treatment of a broken arm!
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The second method!
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	The strengthening of the extension!
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	The treatment of a fracture near the muscle!
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	The treatment of a fracture at the elbow!
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	The final step!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	The treatment of an internal infection!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method for strengthening the fracture!
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	The final step!
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	The final step!
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	A new dimension!
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	The final step!
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The final instruction!
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The conclusion!
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	The final verdict!
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	The final warning!
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	The final advice!
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	The final caution!
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The final instructions!
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	The final instructions for the splint!
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	The final instructions for feeding the patient!
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The final instructions for the patient's recovery!
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	The final caution!
Capitol .xii.	It seems that we have reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The final topic!
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	A detailed description of the arm!
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	A description of fractures in the arm!
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	A description of the treatment and recovery process!
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	A description of a more challenging fracture!
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	A description of a particularly severe fracture!
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	A description of the treatment process!
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	A description of a more complex fracture!
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	A description of a particularly severe fracture!
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	A description of the treatment process!
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	A description of the importance of rest!
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	A description of the treatment process!
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	A description of the doctor's role!
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	A description of the patient's situation!
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	A description of the patient's situation!
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	A description of a serious injury!
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	A description of the treatment process!
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	A description of the importance of understanding the names and positions of the stars!
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	A description of the treatment process!
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	A description of the importance of using soft and moist cloths!
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	A reminder to monitor the patient's progress!
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	A description of a treatment process for inflammation!
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	A description of the importance of not moving the affected limb too much!
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	A description of the final stage of treatment!
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	A description of the importance of nutrition in the healing process!
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	A description of the importance of patience in the healing process!
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	A description of the patient's recovery!
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	A description of the time it takes for the fracture to heal!
Capitol .xiii.	It seems we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	It seems we've reached the final chapter of the manuscript!
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	A warning about the importance of gentle treatment for wrist and finger fractures!
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	A description of the treatment process for wrist and finger fractures!
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	A description of the treatment process for bone fractures!
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	A description of the treatment process for bone fractures!
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	A description of the treatment process for finger fractures!
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	A description of the application of a splint!
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	A description of the treatment process for fractures in the outer parts of the hand!
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	A description of the treatment process for finger fractures!
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	A description of the treatment process for fractures in other fingers!
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	A final thought on the importance of careful consideration in restoration!
Capitol .xiv.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The final chapter!
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	A description of the restoration process for a fractured vertebra!
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	A description of the treatment process for a fractured vertebra!
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	A description of what to do if an abscess forms!
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	A description of the wrapping process!
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	A description of the wrapping process!
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	A description of the final stage of the treatment process!
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	A description of the final step in the treatment process!
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	A description of the importance of proper wrapping and binding in the treatment process!
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	A description of the final step in the treatment process!
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	A description of the final step in the treatment process!
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	A description of what to do if the bone is dislodged!
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	A conclusion!
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	A warning about the importance of proper treatment!
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	A final remark about the duration of the treatment!
Capitol .xv.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	The title of the final chapter!
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	A warning about the importance of proper treatment!
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	A description of the consequences of ignoring or mishandling a fracture!
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	A description of the process of restoring a fracture!
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	A description of the final step in the treatment process!
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	A final remark about considering all the dispositions!
Capitol .xvi.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	The title of the final chapter!
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	A description of the bones in the leg!
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	A description of the treatment process for fractures in the leg!
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	A description of what happens when two bones are broken together!
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	A description of what happens when the smaller bone in the leg is broken!
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	A description of what happens when the larger bone in the leg is broken!
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	A description of the final step in the treatment process!
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	A cautionary note about the importance of gentle treatment!
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	A description of the surgical process for fractures in the leg!
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	A description of the wrapping process for fractures in the leg!
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	A description of the positioning of the bones in the leg!
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	A description of the application of a splint to the leg!
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	A cautionary note about the importance of proper treatment in fractures!
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	A passage about careful observation and treatment of the leg!
Capitol .xvii.	The final chapter!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The title of the final chapter!
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A description of the frequency and types of fractures affecting the heel, foot, and toes!
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	A description of the treatment for fractures affecting the bones of the foot!
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	A description of the process of reducing and stabilizing fractures in the foot!
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	A description of the application of an emplastre (a type of bandage) to stabilize the foot!
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	A description of the process of securing the emplastre with bandages and other materials!
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	A description of the timing and procedure for removing the splint!
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	A description of the process for treating fractured toes!
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	A description of the process for treating fractured toes (continued)!
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	A description of the process for treating multiple toe fractures!
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	A final reminder to consider all the causes mentioned earlier!
Capitol .xviii.	The final chapter!
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	The title of the final chapter!
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	A description of the treatment for a fractured clitoris!
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	A description of the treatment for a fractured clitoris (continued)!
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	A description of the treatment for a fractured clitoris (continued)!
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	A final instruction on the treatment for a fractured clitoris!
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	A description of an additional treatment for a fractured clitoris!
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	A final step in the treatment for a fractured clitoris!
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	A description of the treatment for a fractured bone in the pelvis!
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	A final reflection on the importance of understanding and applying the principles described in this book!
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	A description of the treatment for a fractured penis!
Capitol .xix.	The final chapter!
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	A description of the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound!
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	A warning about the importance of prompt treatment when there is a fracture with a wound!
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	A description of the treatment for a wound that is bleeding!
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	A description of the importance of prompt treatment and restoration after a fracture!
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	A description of the treatment for an abscess (apostema) that has developed after a fracture!
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	A description of the treatment for a fractured bone that is prominent above the knee!
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	A description of the treatment for a fractured bone that requires reduction and alignment, using a specialized tool!
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	A description of the importance of careful handling and alignment during the surgical procedure!
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	A description of the shape and structure of the instrument being used!
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	The final description!
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The name of the instrument!
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The importance of precise positioning!
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	The process of realigning the bone!
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	The importance of aligning the bone fragments!
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	The importance of reducing the bone to its proper position!
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The importance of removing the bone fragments!
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	The importance of confirming the reduction and providing relief to the patient!
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The final steps in the treatment process!
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	The final touches on the treatment process!
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	The importance of caution when treating fractures!
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	The characteristics of a ligamentous fracture!
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	The importance of proper wound care!
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	The use of ointments and medications!
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	The importance of patience and careful observation!
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	The importance of patience and observation when treating wounds!
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	The importance of careful observation and treatment!
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	The importance of prompt treatment and proper care!
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	The importance of proper care and attention! The importance of prompt treatment and proper care!
Capitol .xx.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	A new topic!
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	The importance of recognizing and treating swelling!
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	The importance of administering the right medication!
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The importance of gentle compression and the use of lead to reduce swelling!
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The importance of draining and removing excess fluid!
Capitol .xxi.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	The importance of restoring the natural function of the affected limb!
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	The importance of considering multiple factors when treating a fractured bone!
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The importance of nourishment and gentle care!
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The importance of gentle traction and continued treatment!
Capitol .xxii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The importance of careful treatment when restoring fractured bones!
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The importance of allowing the affected limb to return to its natural function!
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	The importance of cautioning against unnecessary and potentially harmful medical interventions!
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	The use of medicinal herbs and other natural substances to treat wounds!
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	The importance of gentle massage and movement to aid in the healing process!
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	The importance of careful and precise treatment when dealing with complex medical conditions!
Capitol .xxiii.	It looks like we've reached the end of the manuscript!
De sermo en dislocacio.	The art of setting broken bones!
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	The consequences of dislocation!
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	The importance of prompt reduction in cases of dislocation!
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The risks of delaying reduction during the inflammatory stage!
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	The importance of prompt and gentle treatment during the inflammatory stage!
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	The importance of treating the entire affected area!
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	The conclusion of the section on dislocation!
Capitol .xxiiii.	The final chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	The treatment of dislocation of the jawbone!
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	The treatment of temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dislocation!
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The return to normalcy when the dislocation is minor!
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	The importance of prompt and gentle reduction when the dislocation is complete!
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The importance of gentle and precise manipulation!
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	The use of cold water and oil to facilitate reduction!
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	The use of gentle and soothing methods to aid in medical treatment!
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	The importance of rest and relaxation!
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The importance of gentle and easy treatment!
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	The complications that can arise when the jawbones are not properly reduced!
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	The dire consequences of neglecting proper treatment!
Capitol .xxv.	The final chapter!
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The treatment of clavicular dislocation!
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The dislocation of the collarbone!
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of the collarbone!
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The use of manual pressure!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	The application of emplasters and powders!
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The importance of proper treatment and reduction!
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	The importance of gentle and soothing treatment!
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	The reduction of the muscle extremity!
Capitol .xxvi.	The final chapter!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	The reduction of muscle dislocation!
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The three ways in which the muscle can become dislocated!
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second way in which the muscle can become dislocated!
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The ease and difficulty of muscle dislocation!
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The consequences of muscle dislocation!
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	The importance of taking action!
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	The importance of recognizing the dislocation!
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	The importance of a clear and direct touch!
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The importance of early reduction!
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction process!
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	The treatment plan!
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The treatment process!
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	The reduction technique!
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	The importance of gentle treatment!
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Another reduction technique!
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	Another treatment approach!
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	The use of cloths to prevent irritation!
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The extension and binding of the arm!
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The use of a scale to measure the patient's arm!
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	The application of the treatment!
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The importance of gentle food for the patient!
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The gradual reintroduction of food and exercise!
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	The use of cauterization to treat joint dislocation!
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	The consequences of failed treatment!
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of the dislocation!
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The application of another binding!
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	The use of baths to alleviate gravity and promote natural movement!
Capitol .xxvii.	It seems that we have reached the end of the text! The final chapter is titled "Capitol .xxvii." which means "Chapter 27".
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	A new chapter!
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The challenges of shoulder dislocation!
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	The importance of prompt treatment and the challenges of apostema caut!
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of the shoulder!
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The return of the shoulder to its proper position!
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	The forceful reduction technique!
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	The two ministers extending the arm!
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The arm is rotated and wrapped!
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	The doctor applies oil to the joint!
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The reduction is paused and the arm is suspended!
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	The bandage is removed!
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	The bandage is reapplied and the process repeated!
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	The use of moist heat and gentle friction to alleviate pain!
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The application of gentle friction to the joint!
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread over the linen instrument of bandage, until it becomes clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	The use of wet compresses to reduce swelling!
Capitol .xxviii.	We've reached the end of the chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The treatment of shoulder dislocation!
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The importance of prompt reduction in shoulder dislocations!
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction technique for shoulder dislocations!
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	The importance of considering the patient's posture during reduction!
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	The importance of careful follow-up after reduction!
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The importance of understanding the anatomy and physiology of the joint!
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	The treatment plan after reduction!
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The use of heat and friction to alleviate stiffness!
Capitol .xxix.	We've reached the end of the chapter!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The treatment of finger dislocations!
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Finger dislocations can be quite painful!
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	The reduction technique for finger dislocations!
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	The post-reduction care for finger dislocations!
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	The importance of gentle stretching and extension after reduction!
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	The importance of consistent exercise and stretching after reduction!
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	The importance of proper alignment and movement after reduction!
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	The importance of proper alignment and movement after reduction, regardless of the location of the dislocation!
Capitol .xxx.	We've reached the final chapter!
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The treatment of cervical spine dislocations!
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	The severity of cervical spine dislocations!
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The devastating consequences of cervical spine dislocations!
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	The devastating consequences of cervical spine dislocations are fully realized!
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The incurability of cervical spine dislocations in childhood!
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	The conclusion of the treatise!
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	The final verdict on gelbozitation!
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The only hope for cure!
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The patient's position during treatment!
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	The use of wooden supports during treatment!
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The role of the minister in holding the wooden supports!
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final adjustments to the wooden supports!
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The final step in securing the wooden supports!
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The final stage of treatment!
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	The alternative treatment method!
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The final stage of treatment!
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	The final stage of treatment!
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	The final stage of treatment!
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	The final stage of treatment!
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The final stage of treatment!
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	The final stage of treatment!
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	The final stage of treatment!
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The final instructions for the treatment!
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	The final instructions for the treatment!
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	The final instructions for the treatment!
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	The warning about the importance of proper treatment!
Capitol .xxxi.	The final chapter!
De curacio de anca dislocada.	The title of the chapter!
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The discussion on the hip joint and muscle junction!
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The discussion on the types of hip joint dislocations!
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The discussion on the frequency of hip joint dislocations!
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The discussion on the signs of hip joint dislocation!
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The discussion on the reduction of hip joint dislocation!
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	The discussion on reducing recent hip joint dislocation!
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	The discussion on treating persistent hip joint dislocation!
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The discussion on the extent of hip joint dislocation!
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	The discussion on the extent of hip joint dislocation!
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	The discussion on the commonality of hip joint dislocation!
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	The discussion on hip joint dislocation!
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	The discussion on hip joint dislocation!
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	The conclusion on hip joint dislocation!
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The conclusion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	The conclusion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The conclusion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	The discussion on reducing hip joint dislocation!
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The final sentence!
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	The final conclusion!
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	The final conclusion!
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	The final conclusion!
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	The final conclusion!
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	The final conclusion!
Capitol .xxxii.	The title of the next chapter!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The title of the next chapter!
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The description of hip joint dislocation!
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of hip joint dislocation!
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The treatment of hip joint dislocation!
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction of hip joint dislocation!
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The treatment and recovery of hip joint dislocation!
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The recovery and rehabilitation process!
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	The importance of gentle extension!
Capitol .xxxiii.	The final chapter!
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The treatment of ankle dislocation!
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The nature of ankle joint dislocation!
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle joint dislocation!
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of ankle joint dislocation!
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The importance of proper treatment when ankle joint dislocation is severe!
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	The importance of proper positioning!
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	The process of realigning the ankle joint!
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	The importance of repetition!
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	The final stage of treatment!
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	The importance of patience and repetition!
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	The importance of gentle handling and protection!
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	The process of extending and stabilizing the ankle joint!
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The process of reducing and stabilizing the ankle joint!
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	The final stages of treatment and recovery!
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	The importance of protecting and preserving nerve function!
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	The process of gradually increasing mobility!
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The process of gradual healing and rehabilitation!
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	The importance of proper treatment and rehabilitation!
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	The importance of seeking medical attention if complications arise!
Capitol .xxxiiii.	The end of the text!
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The title!
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The conclusion!
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	The importance of positioning!
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	The process of gradual mobilization!
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The process of gradual strengthening and recovery!
Capitol .xxxv.	The end of the text!
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The introduction to a new topic!
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	The consequences of improper treatment!
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The importance of proper treatment and humility!
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	The importance of early intervention!
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The importance of proper treatment and management!
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	The complexity of treating a dislocation with a fracture!
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	The conclusion and final message!
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	The final words!
Amen.	The classic Christian phrase of affirmation!
