Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus we begin the treatment of the disease of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequence in it, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you complete what I have written in this treatise, which is part of the operation of my own hand, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation of my hand is spread out in our region and in our time, entirely private, until the force of its science is felt, and its vigilance is stopped; and there remain no remnants of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the more and induce error and hesitation until the intentions of it are closed and its strength is elongated and its art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that you will vivify this hand in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for which comes with the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why no one has been found to be a skilled artist in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that it covers the entire actor within, which must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes Galen's knowledge until they know the juvenation of members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the consciousness of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their inclination; and of pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their sediment.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason, Hippocrates said that a name is vain, unless it is manifest in the small work, and mainly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this about that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not evacuated from error, for which they will die, just as you have seen many of them, because they are formatted in this science and get away from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has incidentally made an incision on the neck of a woman, and incidentally cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out until the woman almost died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed into his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and tried to extract that stone with an instrument of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called him a destroyer, and I saw that due to the greatness of the stone and due to the disposition of the patient's body, he could not overcome it and would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a crude incision on the black crust which was devouring his fracture in the thigh; and with the doctor's ignorance, he estranged the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and astelas in a strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he dislocated the joints according to his foolish desires, and then he relaxed, and then he left it for some days and commanded that we should not disturb the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot became apostematous, and he brought about loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you have already called him a destroyer, and he has been revealed to dislocate the limb, and consequently there is tranquility and thus also an increase of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to walk with the corruption in the limb until the patient's condition worsened.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous apostem, and it became ulcerated afterwards for some days, until the malignancy of it was magnified in his lord's sense.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him with iron of all, but rather that it was a member which suffered from all, as if it had been held back.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of my hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there is danger in major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in every place of this book where I have opposed operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your maladies are felicitated and fortified.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And you will follow the best way for the grace of God to obtain health and laudable success, and leave behind the terrible maladies of difficult healing, and leave behind your arms from that which makes you afraid, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you are not evasive: because more remains in your glory, and thus also in the world and finally in your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Some fevers are released in certain evil humors:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	There is no bad doctor who does not know the name of a bad disease.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the furnishings of cauteries, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of plasters, and of extraction of arrows and of similar things, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of curvature of twisted limbs and of similar things; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About cautery, I will speak and provide acute medicine and remember the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Here begins the treatise on the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will discuss the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complexity it is prohibited to use cauteries.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cautery and of its instrument is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and to me it seems sufficient to take a small part of their sermons, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauteries universally correspond to all complexity in matter or matters, except for two complexities, which are cold complexities without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In cold and dry complexity with matter they disagree; for some said that cauteries are helpful for that, and others said the contrary of that, that cauteries are not convenient in illnesses which are due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry illnesses are healed by hot and dry cauteries.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say to him who says the contrary of that, that by cauteries it is made helpful in all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complexity of fire, you find men's bodies are fragile.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say through the sermon of that, that I have experimented and already discovered many times in my life.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Moreover, I do not think that it is necessary to speak about that which has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter on cauteries by previous exercise, and to know the diversity of complexity of men's bodies and the disposition of illnesses in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Moreover, in the other complexities, it is not about your fear, and mainly in fragile and humid illnesses, because already all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree on the help of cauteries in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cauteries is fire and its goodness, so concerning cauteries I am combining medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which does not pass except to the member that is cauterized and does not harm another member unless it is a small nuisance.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Moreover, the action of combining medicine passes to that in the members where it is united, and strengthens their coming into the ill member with difficult healing and strengthens their assistance.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Moreover, fire, through its sublime quality and good substance, does not do anything but overflow; and it is already known to us through experiment and the length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I am excused from the length of this sermon. And if it were not that it is not read in my book on this subject, you would have a secret hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion through which it expels illnesses, a philosophical sermon demonstrated, which would be acutely seen in your pious steps.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is convenient to use cauteries and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the nuisance from the accidental time is submerged in the help of that which I have said about cauteries, and mainly if the cauteries are for pains or necessary pains, strong and steadfast, which do not suffer tardiness because they fear those that come with evil, which is greater than small nuisance entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it is not hidden in your steps, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that illness which is healed by cauteries it is not returned at all times, and pauses that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not seen thus by those who do not understand it, because cauteries are not but in place of medicine which alters the complexity and dries the humidity which are the causes why pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	More masters should excel in superficial medicine to validate its value and virtue of their operation and greatness of their lord's sense.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease returns at some hour of time, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their disease, and its virtue, and what has been prepared in the body by the aggregation of superfluous fluids, and what has been received by it in its acquisition of vices and semblances of those causes; unless the disease in which a cautery is administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluous fluids and humidity, thus as a cautery on the teeth for pain and semblance to that, it is possible that in it no return of that pain occurs, but rather it happens in a small way.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, since they believe that it is not a cure that profits from medicine nor another cause that profits from cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not but when we administer many ways of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not confer, and at the end of the cause we administer thus cautery, and it profits from that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And therefore it is clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, but according to the intention which is understood by the common people and foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And they said that ancient people believed that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a breach, as it is not absolutely virtuous, because you already have it probed and experimented that it does not do this except in certain bodies, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, thus as they said; but more masterfully when you make cautery with a focus of gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and then prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust it above the ignition, the gold melts per focus, and also in the focus certain laminas are made so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, it is done to make cautery with iron, we cannot push lightly and more profoundly into the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And now I have ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that one can easily find what one wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for pain in the head due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the accidental service of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of swelling and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the shoulders and ears flowing, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and gout, and universally of all disease that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to be evacuated from medicine lacative mind, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then it commands them to shave their head with a razor, and then make a seat between the thighs above a heated bench and place their hands on their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor of your palm then put the fingers on the razor between the nostrils of your nose.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More masterfully, as the finger said of my own place is received, it signs that place with tension, and then ignites the cautery olive wood of which this is the form.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the place marked with tension, in a way that descends, as which the finger of mine is constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and regard the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, thus as the quantity of grains of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not turn to your hand in that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the bone what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the place and let it sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the covered cloth in a bundle and let it sit until the crust of the focus is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with angelic tetrafarmacon until it is healthy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they said that when the Roman plague was uplifted, so many wounds got healed, because it is better and more youthful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that some of them who had been cautery-ized on the back bone until to the bone, and held the cautery until it was adhered to some part of the specific bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then you should rasp that which is adhered to the bone, and then you should cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They say that others who apply the cautery to the back, so that it penetrates into the bone strongly, and this is the way of making small incisions:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they think that from that place they extract the vapors from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it has been held in an open wound for a long time, and then you should cure it until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries at all, unless in some homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, I am better, for it is said that salvation is when the head is freed from the continuous solution of the same, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is mostly safe and better, I see; and from that house and in that work, I am saved.
Capitol segon.	Head according to.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the whole head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in a prolonged patient, and uses remedies such as poultices and bandages and capillaries and implants and gauzes and cadels and wadding, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not profit from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and weak, then that cautery is another cautery below that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then you should cauterize above the horn of the sieve-like head with a cautery, so that the cord is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and uncover the bone as much as we have recounted and cauterize it with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place called "vas" - and it is that place where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in this way, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient suffers from great diverse pain due to that, rather than the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery which cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle place of the head; and this is the way of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-ancient migrating [humors].
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain is felt in the head, or it is a sudden pain until the vein, then evacuate with mondifying medicines of the mundane head, and administer another cure, which you have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if it does not profit, then cautery is done in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	One cautery with acute burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrape it and bind the extremities of the hand with both heads.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet, so that it is in the same location below the cord, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then you strengthen it above the hand that is stopped by constant constriction, and thus it remains for three hours; and then you dissolve the poultice and remove the salt, and thus the wound is opened for two or three days, and then you pause on the underlying part submerged in water until the place forms a crust.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see, make some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	One cautery with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cautery of which this is the way.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus formed like a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then you pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand - so that the artery which is beneath is not hurt - and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it which is hurt by the specification of the cord thus as the magnitude of it, and raise your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not hurt, so that there is no flux of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you immerse the part in salt water and pause it on the place, and thus it remains for three days; and then you pause the part well-covered in bandage, and then you cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cautery is done on the extremity of the cutter according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this non-ancient migrating [humors] properly.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient migrating [humors].
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat a migrating disease that we have spoken of in the previous treatment, and which we have mentioned in the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not abound to what we have said of the first cautery in medicine or of the cautery in focus, then you should ignite the cautery tool within so it is whitened, because it indicates above the line of the long disease which is the greatest part of what has been said; and pause your hand for a moment and strengthen it inside to incise the artery and penetrate inside the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not affected by that, so that spasms do not occur.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is blocked, because in the blockage of it there is fear, and mostly to one who ignores what he does and is not skilled and experienced; and thus the operation begins on him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find remedy in remembering the rule of blood flow regulation according to the usual method, at the usual place of this free treatment.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness does not abound to this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, then cautery it in the middle place of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the plague until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of straightening of arteries with cautery having two handles, and it is a better cauteryization, more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the Cauterization of Ear Pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with causative remedies and another treatment which has been said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And place the point at the ignition, and it should be directed towards the environment of the entire ear thus as a wheel is turned around, or in a circle of some sort if the pain is somewhere.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Also, you have the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, because then you will feel the spot where you are trying.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you cautery multiple points throughout the entire ear, and that is it, and then cure the spots until they are healthy.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the Cauterization of Turture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turture, which is treated and cautery is not only for the species that come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of turture with herbs and capillary and gargling, and do not complete your treatment, then it is necessary to cautery the illness in three cauteries: the first is at the root of the ear, and the second is a little below the usual temple, and the third is at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery tool for the opposite part of the ailing area, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cautery is that you cautery it with the cautery tool in the direction of the extremity of the ear, then slightly above the crown of the head, and in another temple, the length of which is according to the length of the said bone, and pause your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatness of the species of the codeina is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery tool, and it is a species of cutting instrument, the form of which is described in detail.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more subtle because one little thing is thus as you see; and it is necessary to cut in the excessive fat a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the spot where it is described, until it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and do not complete your medication and the illness does not have fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: on all the crowns of the head; and with cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cautered above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more difficult; and then it is cured with what proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the Cauterization of Oblivion Caused by Flux.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give to the patient at the beginning large doses and pills that are wonderfully serving.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then raise the entire thigh of the patient and place it on the wooden splint described in the treatise on splints.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Place those warm cloths, because that is the manner of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the method which I have already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if the patient is sane; and if not, then make three cauteries on the upper part of the head, which descend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the thick padding of the finger between each cautery, and then take care to make the cautery with what is proceeding.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you find the patient is tolerant, then make the cautery in a middle place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care to bring it inside so that it may be healthy; and let the olive-shaped cautery be according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of paralysis and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Because you are proceeding in mondification of the head with gums and with what we have said; and then raise the patient's head, and then cauterize it with cauteries in the middle place of the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize above the upper part of it, and three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body due to many illnesses and the patients are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make cauteries until it is relieved of the cold humors, and raise the tie that holds it.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And take care to bring it inside so that it may be healthy, and let this olive-shaped cautery be.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not that the epileptic is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it is necessary to mondify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and in the other cure, which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gentle gargles and moderate servings of mondifying wine, beforehand for several days, with good purification of the veins.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And raise the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the back of the head, and above each horn of the head it is cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive-shaped cautery be according to what has been previously stated.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is an infant, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said in the paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that purifies his brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And raise the patient's head, and then make a tortoise-shaped decently made device of lead on the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held firmly by all parties.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is better to use an old broth of sheep's milk.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for temperate warmth by measure, which is said to be sufficient when it is mixed with it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle of the patient's head in the circle, and let him be until he is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And make the patient take it for a whole week, once a day, as the other regimen of his good health; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to the size of the head, but keep your hand in one cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery that humidifies the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that cooked in a broth or in grayish juices of walnut.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of descending water in the vein.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the vein through the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and keep him from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And it makes that sweating in bath water through various joints.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave the head cap, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if there is beginning of watering in both eyes, or on one side if there is beginning of watering in one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Including the cauteries to all the veins and arteries, which are seen descending from the spine; and place the cauteries in that length along the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, stop with some medicine, which is as much as possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some veins are cauterized at the neck below two bones with two cauteries, thereby producing a remedy.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and assuaged through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid matter, then cauterize that with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of watering in the eyes, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries at the neck below both temples, and with two cauteries at the neck below both bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you find indication of addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the eye over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of foul odor of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that with what we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare and give to the patient three nights' worth of medicines; and place a bandage around the head, and cauterize that with a cautery made from a mixture of olive oil and other ingredients.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a clave-shaped cautery, with two cauteries on both eyebrows below the hair, a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the clave-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization of relaxation of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed due to weakness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that over both eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire partition, and thus elongate the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid should be touched.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted into inward-growing parts and pierces the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eye is converted into inward-growing parts and thus pierces the eye, cauterize in those cases according to two methods, because the cautery is either with iron or with combustible medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with a focus, command the patient to stay within that which reads the six skin layers thus as those which are in the world, until they are prolonged and strengthened; and if it pierces that which needs its nourishment, then strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not weakened until the skin is born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and strengthened, then pause the head of the patient in the tieu seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the eyes of the patient with a tent, with a signal that is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and it is the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause, covered in an album of wool or in a mucilage of powder over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery, of which this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which is signed, little by little, in moistened motifs, until the surface of the spine which is thus like a leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the signal of sanity of the entire work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin of it elevated from the punctuation of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then pause over the entire surface with a border until the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the skin returns to its original cause and the eyelid is relaxed, then make another vein for the cautery over that entire thing, just as you had done primarily.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the skin is on the eyelid, then it should be elevated to its natural position and be cleansed so that the skin does not touch the wheel.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	The cautery in medicine is a burning remedy that commands the patient to lift their skin so that it is prolonged and cleansed, and then make a chart of the fabric of the mirror-like skin.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap of walnut and cause living water to flow from the wound. And then take soap of walnut and cause living water to flow into the ulcer. Where the water is, and then mix those causes well, and make that an antidote so that it is not frozen; and then spread that over the chart which was made thus in the form of a mirror-like skin, and place that on one wheel of two; and place the wheel with the coto (knot) embedded in album of wool, and the head of the patient be in the position of the tie.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little so that the patient does not feel the bitterness of the medicine, because bitterness is in it as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus as you will perceive that the bitterness is gone, then leave the medicine and take it to the same finger; thus as the bitterness ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as if washed from constriction or incision, because then it will be; and if not, return to that of the medicine on the place where you did not apply the medicine and do not deny until your operation is cleansed and the wheel is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place on the knot with the bandage to eradicate the venom of the adjustment, and then cure it with a definite unguent or another so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent vigilance so that the medicine does not fall on the wheel, and if the eyelid is mollified after some days and any cause of skin touches the wheel, then iterate your medicine on the place where the eyelid is mollified, and properly thus as it was done at the beginning, and then envelop it so that it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirror-like skin.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the wheels of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to what was made your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it will not be confused with the way of straightening towards that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not confuse your cure, then be careful to cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head thus in the position, and hold the head of some minister between the positions more in such a way that it is not moved nor agitated by the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a knot embedded in an album of wool or in a mucilage of ptilly over the wheel of it.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which should be conquered, thus as it is a form of cane or of wing of a volturer, from one extremity to the other where the cautery was made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out thus as you stretch.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, I command that which is concave is better at the tender work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then take the fistula if it is open, and draw out its humor and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery which was ignited, and you have that in hand a little away from the cautery of the wheel at the bridge of the nose, so that it does not hurt your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the wheel and corrode that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus at the beginning of the wheel cautery, you will perceive into the bone, well; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place on that knot with a bandage and envelop it with an unguent exsiccatiu until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if they have passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place on the medicine with an acute corrosive until the bone is uncovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And it is another method of cautery of fistula which the first doctors discovered: then in the place of the fistula and do that and place on that fissure subtly, of which this is the form of it: Put in that a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and you have your hand in subtle good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the wheel of it; and take care to place on the wheel of the patient a knot embedded in an album of wool or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous sanitation.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cautery and treatment, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula in its proper place in the body according to how it will return to its own location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the ulceration of the toes.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Mouth ulcers appearing suddenly in the lips, and worsening in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those ulcers as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And it is the conquest of the patient according to the subtlety of his skin.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then stop that instrument carefully in those ulcers until the cautery penetrates to the root of the ulcers.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When on the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth, an abscess is formed and then breaks, and it is ruptured, and it is antiquated, and correct breaking and it makes a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then place that ignition in the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand until it penetrates to the iron ignited at the root of it, and afterwards make one or two ulcers; and then treat that wound as we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And then if the wound is abscessed and healed, it is well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and remove the corrupted bone according to how it will return to its own chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then stop the head of the patient in the same place, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come to be thus, also so that you stop the handle on the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery, holding your hand for a little while, until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth where the ignited cautery has penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to how you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should hold his mouth full of salt water for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is toned up and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness, or there is cold or worm in it, or does not confide in the treatment with medicine, then cautery is applied to that in two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a cauldron of iron, and then take a thread and wrap it around the extremity of the instrument, and then merge it into the boiling horn, and stop it on the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then iterate that several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge the thread or instrument in the aforementioned horn, and stop it on the aching tooth, and stop on that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, the emperor ordered that cauterization with fire is that you attend to the quantity of iron or iron, and it is in the heart of some gross humor and the acuity of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and stop it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that by impression of that cautery the patient should hold his mouth full of good horn and keep it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with what you wish to extirpate according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of tumors.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When tumors are of phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this: having two extinguished extremities so that they may receive the fumes from the cautery through the other extremity, and stop the ignited cautery on the abscess one time, and another if it is necessary for that, until it penetrates to the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and then lift it for three days and place it on the affected area until it is well-cooked in order to consume what the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is wounded and torn, and draw together until it is whole again.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or of two cauteries is such as to convoke.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of wounds of the foot and of constrictions of the thigh.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by complexity of phlegm, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with medicines that are laxative, and then cauterize that which has deviated from the rule in the predetermined place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not penetrate with the cautery to the rule of the thigh, nor do you burn the code of it except a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that which is beyond the cautery deviated from the joint of the neck in the back spinal cord of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery of it be shaped according to the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that which is preceded until it is whole again.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When coughs and diseases of the lung are from cold humors and the patient has no fever nor thirst, and it is an ancient disease, then cauterize that which is with two cauteries on the forked part in the predetermined places, and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be shaped according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the form of which precedes in the pointing out of pain of the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points until it reaches those; and then heal that which is preceded until it is whole again.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now let the cautery have three ramps because the cauterization is in this way: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of gout that is at the head of the help.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the help is dislocated by reason of lubricating cold humors and it is not fixed at the hour of its usual return, until it is in its usual custom of returning, and then for a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is ended, as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first, and then let the patient be reversed on his back or on his side; and then lift the code which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated below.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauteries having two heads; and this is their form.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the code until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtleties according to the quantity of tension; and this is their form.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some views are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause on the cautery, piercing as in salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a shaped cautery or with three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold comes into the stomach and many cold humors enter to extract its completeness and it is multiplied in it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confuse them, then it is necessary for the patient to be on his back with his arms extended and his thighs, and then cauterize that which is with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest according to the quantity of a finger in a shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the sides of the chest, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so that they will make a purge.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the two tiers of the thickness of the code.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized pointedly at that which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish with tension, and then cauterize that which is with a pointed cautery; and then heal that which is with the cure that precedes until it is whole again.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	About the cauterization of the feverish foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the foot is painful due to coldness or humidity or excessive wind entering, which disrupts its normal complex structure and causes superfluous egress, and it is cured by the method we have described and not by comforting, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and three cauterizations are applied in this form and quantity, measuring them above the foot just below the hips, so that the decubitus of the man is perceived.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be between each cautery according to the thickness of the digit, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not comprehend with your hand when applying the cautery movement.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that has been absorbed is equal to the quantity of the majesty of the specific codeina, and it does not need further adjustment; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and raised their legs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and let the specific codeina of the whole body be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the entire body and penetrates into the intestines, because the codeina here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	About the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an ulcer or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel heavy and grave pain, and their suffering will be acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and often the doctors are exhausted from treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned onto their back; and place a sign on the area of the abscess with a probe; and place a ignited cautery, which is assembled like a rag, in the form that was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire codeina is combined, until it penetrates to the ciphalic, until it reaches the sana.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that for the cure of other abscesses until it is healthy.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine has prolonged it, and in many of which most maladies are known; more, I have experimented with some vague things being said about this operation, but I will leave that to you, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	About the cauterization of wounds.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology wounded in this manner, being made by those who took from the roots of Aristology a long and dry root that is found, and it is of the thickness of the digit.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and expose it to fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that place where the furcula meets the neck; and there are two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the cisterna, declining slightly towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back parts; and a cautery at that place where it is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary that you comprehend with your hand on the cauteries, but rather it should be in the manifestation of the codeina in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And thus I have described the ancient cauteries that are similar to those of men who use iron-like cauteries resembling a ray and igniting them, and placing them in that place which is between the ribs, until they penetrate to that abscess and healthy sania is restored, just as we have said in the case of the abscess on the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	More, in this perforation with cauteries, there is no fear, because I have seen that it often happens that the cautery accidently falls on the fistulous place where it does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	About the cauterization of the hernia.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the malady of the hernia with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not contradict your cure, then cauteries are applied in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four lines according to the length of the hernia, according to the figure of the cauteries on the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And if you are between any cautery the greatness of a finger or a few months, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have described in the cautery of the foot's gout.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not comprehend your hand in the cautery; and the patient is to be elevated on two pillows.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterying, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two virtues, which causes have been described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and elevates the cord which is at the end of the thigh where the patient feels the pain on the left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And it is your elevation that you elevate the cord according to the length of the body, so that you make points with cauteries according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two virtues, ignite motion, in that entry where those penetrate the cord of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus you make four points with cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cautery with a cautery having three virtues.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery, so that it has been freed from getting broken for three years, because many are more confident that the other causes preceding in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the Cautery of Dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteries are not made in dropsy, but rather in a circular manner properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the dropsical patient with the manners of cure which have been described in the division and do not contradict your cure, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries in the circle of the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the foot, and one cautery on the thigh, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right of the chest, and one cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the cord.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it gets broken for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from cure then with the cautery, which is necessary for that to be added to the two intentions, and will be fixed to the healthy assistant.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery which is cauterized on the belly is club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that which is cauterized on the back which is olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cautery of Feet and of the Hips.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are apostematized in dropsy and are full of watery humor, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it all, because the watery humor is reduced.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make points on both hips with two cauteries, and in each hip a cautery is made at the extremity of the cutting cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And it is the cautery according to the length of the hip: one on the outer side and another on the middle place of the hip; and on each hip two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And then leave the open plague for a long time cure so that some watery humor is reduced from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the patient with those causes which have been described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the Cautery of the Belly and of the Stomach.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is cold and humid inside so that it debilitates the virtues, then it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured with those manners of cure and do not contradict, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting cauteries of virtue, then cautery that with a great cautery on the entire stomach according to what precedes in the cautery of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries in the subtle circle of the navel, with a subtle club-shaped cautery; and with a cautery on the upper part above the large waist, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidity exhibits and the patient tolerates it, then cautery that on the epigastric region and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, because it is a perfect cure of youthful vigor which does not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cautery of Old Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors cold and corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what has been said in the division and does not contradict their tieue cure, then cautery them with three cauteries on the small triangular spot below the spine of the back, and with a cautery above the navel for two digits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If it is supposed that the patient's stomach is inflamed and their food is not being digested, and their face is often pale, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cautery; and place one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the patient's back, with a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and afterwards take care to heal the interior.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On cauterization of the thigh, afterwards remove them (the cauteries).
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the thigh, then you should ignite the cautery that is assembled into a rod.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Afterwards insert the ignited rod into that removed thigh, and ultimately stop the flow so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make an incision or two, because if the thighs are too thin, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and afterwards take care of those who are afflicted with gout so that they may be healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the patient's nature, divided into their parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the patient's nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when someone has a fistula in their nature behind, and it is ancient, corroding the healthy part of them and corrupting the humidity, and therefore that which is more worthy than covering is that one proceeds with a subtle probe, and afterwards conveys the quantity of the profundity of them before the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Afterwards ignite the cautery that resembles a rod.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And afterwards insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it intersects with the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And hold the cautery over that fistula until the corrupt bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards take care of the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and you have removed from it the bad matters, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it has been entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the bad matters are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of the corrupted bone, or it falls into those causes which will be remembered in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On cauterization of the veins.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the veins there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and thus the joint of the patient's thigh is weakened, then it is fitting that you cauterize that over the veins with a cautery on each vein with a claw-shaped cautery, from which proceeds the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them according to the small design, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and thus they will be more beneficial in youth.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient's urine is not retained, then cauterize that in the most tender part above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of nodes on the skin; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And it is a claw-shaped cautery according to what has been described.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the matrix (or womb).
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and humidity in the matrix (or womb), and thus conception is prohibited, and its menses are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there is pain from the retention of them, then it is fitting that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the umbilical region, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery on the lowest part of the back, or two cauteries, and it is a claw-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humidity gathers and infiltrates into the part of the ankle, and thus false causes of the settling of that place are made, and it is signified that the fracture is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is detected in the boy's hips.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterialize the patient on the affected area of their ankle with a circular cautery, since you have sensed it in the circuit of the affected area like that which is revolved, and so that the affected area returns to its proper place in the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is the cautery of which I previously described the method in the cauterialization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterialize that with three cauteries in the olive-shaped great cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then cure it from within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterialization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle area, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that which is ancient, then you should release the patient from gross humors with foul pills or artificial ones similar to them; and then cauterialize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in that is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific methods, one of which is that it cauterially treats the ankle area with three triangular-shaped cauteries according to this form; and do so at a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And it is the space which is between each cautery, according to the quantity of the greatness of the finger and if the olive-shaped or great cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes it is necessary to place the cautery in the proper position on the head of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterialize with the circle in which the method was previously described in the cauterialization of the ankle's dislocation, where the circle contains and combusts the inspection of the entire code.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in certain cases when pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Sometimes if it extends into the thigh, then cauterialize with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is, and with one cautery on the knee joint for four fingers' width below the affected part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutting, and its depth is according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain is extended to the area close to the toes, then cauterialize it here where it complains with a cautery of three points or four or maybe even more if it is deserved.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains of pain beneath the knee towards the thigh, then cautenticate it here with a cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterialization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that you burn nerves or major arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's bad nourishment or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one or another of those who cauterially treated the knee joint and ultimately ended up with a cauterialization that caused inflammation inside until the tumor reached the foot, and it was perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong abscess occurred in the belly, and then that led to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two areas at once, cauterialize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And I will describe the wise men in the cauterialization of the ankle, which is this method: make it similar to a circle of iron, from which the circuit is the size of a palm; and let it be with seven orifices according to the greatness of a finger's bone or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another inch; and let the space between them be according to the quantity of the notch of the thumb; and these circles are used for two areas; and let their length be one or two notches, and make a decently decorated iron edge in those circles; and this is their form.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it is ignited in the fire until it becomes red-hot and sparks, and then it is placed on the ankle area, the patient sitting on a sheet with their legs bent.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterialize it with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a poultice with bandages and leave the open wound for many days; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healthy.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, sons, I have used this type of cautery little for the fear of the regard of God, and for this reason I have found few who regard it above all.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Sometimes some good cauteries are sufficient for him who suffers, and they find them in the place of God.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Sometimes cauteries with adhering medicines are those that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which they insert the hinge of the iron door; let the length of the partition be in the nakedness of them, about two inches or quadruples.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if you leave the space that exists between each quantity of the thickness of the finger; and it is opened below and above, and it is contained between them according to this form.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place a pause on the partition of the water, the patient sitting on the side, and compress your hand on the partition of the water; and take hot water in a circle and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be warm to the small fire, and hold that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the moderate and adjusting of it — because that atrocious moderation is also as from fire — until the moderation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water in double water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave that for some days, and correct its purification; this is the last stage in juvenation.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make a statue of it in what contains water according to what is done in the ankle joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe of alkaline and cause not extinct of two names in one partition, and stir them and pause in a new vessel of which the partition below should be perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause below the bottom of another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and cause living water which takes those for one finger, and since you comprehend those with your tie for good compression, and leave the hole that descends from the water to the partition below to the other vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other alkaline renovators, because at that time it will be very strong acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And thus of the medicines some are those which are cauterized by fire, also as you do with teas and honey and cause a savory in that way so they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which is cured pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed by a visit, also as he recommends, because strong will be his spirit in banishing and escaping from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it should be pressed with certain green herbs, and if it is not found to be green, take fresh figs; and much should be stirred in a few gray things and paused on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and it should be released.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that in banishment and thus when the body of it is disenchanted, entrust that to the soil, because the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it does not cover that some use of cautery in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, I, Escorides, say that when the vein of the goat's foot is cauterized, it benefits; and it is the cautery in the following manner: take a woollen cloth and soak it in old oil, and pause it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry goat's foot and inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized; and then pause it on the woollen cloth and leave it until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then iterate that, and do not cease doing that until the sentiment of the moderation penetrates into the water and repauses the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cautery is called cautery of cow's horns.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the Cauterization of Pain in the Toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some painful toes are in the toes for many causes, such as through injury or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through infusion of cold and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not useful except in this sole species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore it is necessary, then evacuate the patient with prepared pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of it, since you have a tent in each line or cautery, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it should be done with punctual cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial clave cautery according to this form.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	About cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motions are avoided in this illness in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they stumble upon their own structure, lacking elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And the vertebrae in the back of the spine begin to overgrow on top of the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine in a circular motion.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery of two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And then make points properly between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the area within so that it becomes healthy again with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	About cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then how gout of cold cause is cured in a manual way of treatment and the pains are not alleviated, then they remain, and thus cautery remains.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains move into the teeth or to other joints, and this many times is repeated, then cauterize that on each tooth with three cauteries or four of the entire part with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, it is only necessary to surround the affected area of the codena.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains move into the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point around the circle of the ankles thus as it revolves, point on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the circle of the ankles on each notch and on the tip of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains move to the nearby joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire joint.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the illness with good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and the weakness is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	About cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the veins and the intestine comes out of its cavity, and this begins to come out, then it is necessary that you order the patient to stay in his commode for seven days and use gentle causes so that the wound will heal on the seventh day.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient between your hands on the seventh day, and command him to hold his seven wings inside so that it will be fortified or the intestine or hernia will not come out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew it in order to hold the rupture on the bone of the pentagonal shape, signaling the extremity of which is similar to the circle at the subtler parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is its form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes very red and has many sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then pause the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery standing upright, and then on that until you have consecrated the bone of the pentagonal shape into the middle of the divine; and afterwards on that other occasion if you have not achieved it in the first occasion until the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient there will come no death or other great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bone, it does not confer your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	It is necessary that the cautery of the children be subtle according to their age and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with gentle entry so that the crust of the wound is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat those who have other wounds until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The patient should sit on a soft cushion for forty days until the area and plague are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary to pause the nourishment of it according to the length of time of its cure, which empties the belly of it, and that the intestine does not come out during the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when one wants to get up after forty days, then administer gentle and decent food, and hold that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it is warned about exertion and replenishment of food and drink, and violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, they will be entirely healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you should not delay, then cauterize the rupture of that which is being cauterized repeatedly according to its quantity, and it is what is expelled from the intestine thus like the third part of it; and then treat that which has been said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I will show some first cases where the rupture is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked on the tent.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that goes through the width in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and I place my hand on a key-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Hernia.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in some members due to a fall or percussion and persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And it is the cautery of each member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of hernia and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if it is not healed by the first cautery, well; and if not, then iterate over it with the cautery; because of the custom of those pains it is that they are punctured in a member next to that member which approaches the one, so that it is necessary to continue with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some leprous wounds are treated with a cautery for great joy, and magnificently if the type of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And thus as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it is cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor this, and fear about the patient whose corruption comprehends all of their body and all its complexity, then cauterize that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and at the forehead to the end of the hair; and two above the horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally place your hand on the cautery a little while into the bone to make a small impression, and from it the scabs are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the marrow according to what is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cauterize that with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on each hip, and one on each thigh, and two on each knee, and one on each shin, and two on each ankle, and two on each muscle, and two on the tendons of the foot; and cauterize that on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the soles of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are above the ankle that you do not touch those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are treated with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more joyful and confident it is; and you know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus like they have said, because the body of it is already stupified.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints as it is preceded by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should burn the cautery iron in fine powder of iris root, mixing it with honey and another treatment inside so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healthy, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter into the narrowness of the channel of the spine a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And you should take care to insert it gently so that it may be healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes veins are cauterized for some numbness which goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and it is felt in the movement of the nerves which govern that member, and the numbness is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not press on it except for what is known from the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves to the moving whole body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that are gangrene.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to the usual remedies of medicine, then you cauterize on that place with a pointed cautery a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the spine until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And you should take care to make powder from roots and lentils with rose oil and leaves of dragon plant, and blood of dove or blood of pigeon, each one being a part and all are mixed together, and then anoint a bandage and place it on the area until it is healthy.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cauterization of cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that place with a circular cautery in the circumference of it, just as it is turned around.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And I will teach you that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it has not been seen, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and yet I have seen some veins.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize in the circumference of it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of indurations.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some induration is delayed in maturity, and it is because of the superfluous fat that makes it, or because of the state of the patient, since it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten its maturity; then cauterize around it with many small pointed cauteries; and you should leave it so that it may be hastened in maturity.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then you should ignite the cautery of which this is the shape; and place it in the middle of the induration until it penetrates the spine.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you make the cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and you should take care of it until it is healthy.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of corroding ulcers.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding ulcer is a corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that place just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you want to cauterize that corroding ulcer in the place where it suffers from fire, then you should ignite cauteries with many small nails, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where it is corroding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And you should cauterize the whole part until you eradicate all corrosion and none of its causes remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And you should leave it for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a triple layer of oil mixed with scar tissue until all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And you should take care to make powder from flesh-bearing roots.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, well; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corroding ulcer is treated with some old remedies of acute medicine, because that is half in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But Emperor's cautery with fire is to add less juice of juniper.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have said the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division, and so take that when it is in its proper season.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many veins go to the lower parts of the foot afflicted with a wound called "clau", and it is a gross, festering cause which harms the foot; and cauteries are made in those places according to two manners, so it is cauterized with fire and cauterized with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	More cauteries are made at the point where it seems to ignite with a burning pain, which is made of iron according to the quantity that each part contains, and is of subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then stop the ignition on the nail, and return your hand to the cautery in the circuit of the nail until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it like that for three days until you start to feel better gradually.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a poultice made with evil-smelling herbs and salt, and leave the poultice on it for a night, because that will eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place affected by generating new flesh until it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and you have wounds opening on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer those cauteries with water, and it is that you take a cannula of iron or of burning pain, and stop that on the nail; and then pour a little quantity of hot water, and return your hand, and you return that with compression of your hand from top to bottom, and it is implanted in the margin of the cannula at the root of the nail, and you will find the hot water flowing through the root of the nail; and wait for the patient a little while feeling the burning sensation of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus it is done in those places and then you proceed to the other until you overcome all the parts of their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those pus that the roots of the nails are eradicated, and with which the flesh will regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter 3.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you have a trembling due to cold in the nerves or because of a fever caused by cold, or for another similar cause, then it is necessary that you apply cauteries with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and apply a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, a cautery on the olive-shaped part.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of it is relieved and the health of the patient is restored from the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 4.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery of sudden accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body is suddenly afflicted, and pustules appear which are made of gross corrupted matter; therefore it is necessary at the beginning to appear, that it be cautered on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended in fire; or with a root of long erestology; or with a slow cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And ulcers are cautered at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not swollen, and it is dispersed, the superfluous flesh making those, and healthy from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	More often it is necessary that this be done with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 6.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cautery of fluxes of blood accidentally spilled by incision of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Ulcers often have fluxes of blood from an artery that is injured by the wound which it has in front, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and then it seems difficult to stop that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it reaches that point, then you should hold with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop above that the tie which is tied to strengthen those ulcers until the flux of blood stops, and does not flow out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then stop in the fire the olive-shaped cauteries few and large, by name of many, and suffocate above those until they are not ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small one or a large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, above that vein firmly holding it so that you will have restrained the tie, and you will have cauterized until the blood is abolished and restrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you restrain the tie and extract the cauteries, then take another cautery carefully among the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not harm the nerves that are here, and that another evil does not come over the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you know that when the artery flows with blood, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: or with a cautery as I have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of my veins are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a faithful ligature, or that it be stopped by medicines which have the virtue of restraining the blood; and they are strengthened in a pulvine constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	One who administers restrictions decently to the limb and restricts its structure and its wraps or for the position of burning causes and similarities, not comforting but rather tart.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Perhaps if one is not at the doctor's presence or medicine, then make a pause on the indicated finger over the orifice of that vein, as we have said, and understand the great constriction within that the blood is stopped from the superior part of the plague, and about the artery it does not seem to be diminished; and about the artery it seems to be very constricted with great constriction so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and perhaps it is necessary to cauterize or medically treat what has been touched.
Comensa la segonda partida.	It begins the second treatment.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and of vein operations and of flea-botany and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the teachings of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have already said in the first chapter that all malady in which cautery is convenient and medical burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I have ordered the chapters according to the subordinate state of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter for that methodology, so that it may be clarified to the one who seeks it, then about that which will have been demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And therefore I begin here, certainly, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is to terrify what is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that which certainly is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made, such as evacuation of blood from the vein or incision over the abscess or perception of exosture or purification of the wound or extraction of arrowhead or beginning of rock and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their deeds death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that about you none of this falls in which there is sitting, because some evacuations happen from your own hands as men with many kinds of maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is said that they flee from their malady and fear death, and thus for the vehemence of that which finds its malady, and for the length of the malady of it, and in the malady is the fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is the one that gives to your son to have and said, you hoping for that health, and the following malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you do not consent to that which comes to you from this kind of thing; and your caution should be greater than what is written, and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause about it unless with certain scientific knowledge which verifies it from you, and in which you perceive laudable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies with prognosis and indication of it, which is converted health, because in that you are helped above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and not abandon your direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinct from chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be clarified to you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this malady has many evacuations, until the infants are freed from infancy and when the nourishment strengthens the head of the infant with its liveliness.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some evacuations happen because of a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	Perhaps you have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom you have seen are touched by death, and thus it is to me shown a pitiful work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was full of water, and the head of it was always thus magnified until it could not hold itself upright because of the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity made it increase until mortal faintness.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the codena and the bone, or is added below the bone on the siphac.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that case the humidity is between the codena and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is fitting that you make on the middle part of the head a fissure in latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is greater, then there are two fissures here according to this method.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, it seems that you close the commissures of the head obstructed from all parts and the water is pressed out when you compress it in the same manner at the internal partitions and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Look where you find yourself in the middle of the head's location with three fissures according to this manner.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and poultices; and then apply something over it for six days, and then dissolve the liament and cure the plague in tenderness and swelling, and strengthen the head equally; and feed the patient on a dry diet of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And it is another manner of incision, which considers how to expose the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated are more in the occipicii, or on the front side, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the repetition of the water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid those flowings of blood and harm the patient through that flux of blood in evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	The incision of the arteries which are near the auricles, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter following.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are many catarrhs or rheumas in the veins or at the feet, and it is an old thing, and it does not correspond to the cure of medicines, then the last cure is in this incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then look when you want to incise those that the patient's reason loses his head, and apply a dry drap on the location with an asperous cloth so that the arteries appear, and apply strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider the pulse of the vein; and the places of whoever is above the places which are near the auricles, and they occultate themselves in some homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And apply a sign on the artery in tension, and apply incisions whoever is in the spatium of whoever part above in an incision pervading into the bone, and it is for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, enter the spatium below the artery and cut it to equalize the incisions at the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And it is the length of the incision which measures two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised the blood is ejected in a pulsating emission, which jumps frequently before jumping back.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	More if the artery does not appear at the incision, then look where you measure from the auricle the quantity of the space of three digits, and apply a sign in tension, and do so into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And it is that then you extract from the blood the quantity of six ounces. and you should not extract more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and from the repetition of the artery of it.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the ciphac, then incise it so that no abscess forms cautiously.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the plague with poultices and liaments of cloth from it, and then cure it in swelling until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are some ancient immigrations or catarrhs, due to humidity and quality in the lactifers of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not correspond, then we have spoken about these maladies extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's reason loses the skin which are in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the seven pulses, and it is occultated only in few homes due to vehemence of fever.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is occultated, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and apply a dry drap on the location or evaporate the location with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatium of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you score the codeina in that which is facilitated until you penetrate to the artery; and then take it out of the vein and extract it from the upper parts until you extract it from the codeina and discover it from the tunics which are below, from all the part.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is subtle, then envelop it in the extremity of the vein, and incise it from one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and do not find a flux of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate six ounces of blood. Between three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you will find that it lies in two places with double strong cords or long strings, and do not touch the putrid flesh during the consolidation of the plague and endeavour to stop the flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then incise the excess flesh which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery into the bone with a cutting cautery until the extremities of it are incised, and stand in place of that bad mixture.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or is of complicated complexion; because cautery is for those causes that help to end the humidities, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And you will have the extraction of the arteries that fill the place of cutaneous anthrac, and they are placed decently on the soft pulvils, and you will be cured by secret medicines that make the flesh and bones whole again so that it is healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if meanwhile you work on another occasion to stop the flow of blood from the artery, then you touch it to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the place of cutaneous, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the place until the blood is congealed, and envelop the place with water of vehement coldness until the acute pain ceases, and it will be strengthened according to what is desired.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is more suitable in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cutting edges, since you have touched the two places with tension, and pause sometimes, not much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it is elongated what is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And it is the sharpness of the two cutting edges together.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, the Emperor says that if you sharpen the sharpness of two cutting edges better, it is more suitable, because if you have them sharp as two cutting edges proper to each wound, and do not cut the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there is some roughness in those, it is held by the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is more easily abscessed.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And it is the space which is between two cutting edges the quantity of the roughness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the cure of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors of the wells.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the humors are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not contribute to any cause of medicinal cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already turns red and feels in the dry front of walking thus as if it were a walk of ants, and the wells of that one are exhausted, humidifying thus that already their skin is worn out, and the eyebrows are scalped by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient masters mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and no one remembers that cure in space.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the skin which is on the dry front, and then incise in the front three deep fissures equally distant according to the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure falls in two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge-like material or dry fabrics that absorb much blood from the veins.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the division of the temples until the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract all that code which is between two incisions on the siphac which is above the bone, and then make it from the middle incision until the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert this spatula and enter into the first incision another instrument called a cutellar, having one part sharp and the other not sharp.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the layer of that sharp part towards the adjacent flesh next to the code, and the layer of it penetrates into the bone, and fill it until it reaches the middle fissure, and abscesses all those veins that descend from the head to the wells.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It seems that the patient's inflammation should be continued towards the water appearance of the knee, and then make it enter the left fissure into another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Then because of the flow of a large quantity of blood, express the places of the bloody congested passages.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then stop at some warm water fissure of the entire body, and stop over those swollen veins that are surrounded by fire and oil, and watch that no aposteme is cauterized.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the ligature and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then cure it with basilicon oil mixed with rose oil and others, until the wounds are fully healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending humors from the internal divisions of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the catarrh comes with continuous thick mucus, and sometimes the humors of the patient are extended and thin, and already their eyesight is debilitated, and their eyelids are ulcerated and because of this, their skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent extension, then one knows that due to this accident, the matters and catarrh do not come except from many veins of the internal divisions proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a fissure at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the latitude (and begin with the fissure of the left temple towards the right temple; and make an incision into the bone; and extend your hand through the lacertes of the temples which are numb from mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then refill between the two lips of the fissure with warm water or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen underneath with swollen veins surrounded by fire and oil, so that no aposteme is cauterized.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove the water and see that the aposteme has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it begins to form new flesh, and then cure it with a regimen of dry poultices which make the flesh heal, thus if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colofania, mix them together, and make an emplaster and administer it in these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the cure of those that fall into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus like iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus like cez or fava, or it is a fluxing cause thus like water and fire, and its semblance, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when peyra falls into the ear or another similar cause of those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if it is peyra, then distill it with some violet oil or sizami, and administer the extraction of it, and make a purge with conditions, and open the nostrils for the coming of purging.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not evacuated, then administer an extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten in the gestures, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of silver and insert the extremity of the canal into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil, softened so that nothing is opened except the canal.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract it with the strong ventilation, because many evacuated matters come out with water that we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bat or prepared vessels with which the wings of a small quantity are pressed, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently paused.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the tract of the ear facilitated, and then dry the ear of humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And then if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch so that there is no aposteme cauterized or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of touching that is that you at the beginning cleanse the patient's vein sepifica and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a cesura between your hands and convert the ear to the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear from which the grey matter of it is in the place previously mentioned.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	If the lunar figure's fissure is turned towards the stone, and the stone is worn out, then you can apply an appropriate instrument; and apply it to the fissure at that hour with velocity, and heal it so that it is healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause resides in the ear and is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your assent, then take subtle spatula tuned according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to that the abscess of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not make that when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapors of the ear, and place it in many small masses, and try to extract them with small gestures or subtle touches, or as if making an incision, because it is alleviated by the extraction of it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But if the water that has entered the ear covers the patient who uses sternutation to calm down, and fills the entire ear with a lot of noise, and pours over that ear in which there is the water, and if it is forgotten, be it; and otherwise, then take three or four small stones according to the length of the finger, and place them in the focus of one part, and the patient inserts one of those into the hole of their ear and sounds over one part of that side and percusses with another stone on the stone that touches the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then stop pouring water into the ear until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And now the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the focus until it is burned by the bad humor of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And also place another cotton and make as many turns until all the water is forgotten, and draw it out with a cannula, just as it is said of the extra-ordinary stone ear.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beast entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pull and to its semblance, cure it thus as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the time of movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and incisions, and the cause of it is less grievous than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water that we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confuse your cure, then beware lest you expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle incisions, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula straight and wide, from which this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and apply suction with water for strong sucking, and make many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey your assent, then operate and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and find it in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is your effusion which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of copper, straight, in which there is a small hole, and with a flat surface.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it will be as they are used to be in the cavity of the cannula container here, which will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the radish and envelop it decently in the extremity of it, and apply juice of oil in the cavity of the instrument, or sap of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the radish with a gentle touch and express your hand on it with tempered compression until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is poured into the ear is already scaled in focus a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause you distilled into the ear is not too frequent, for the ear medicines do not endure that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of obstruction of ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some turns some infants have not-perforated vents of their mothers' wombs, and that already happens in some homes, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to plague or carnation in that; and this obstruction some turns is made in the press of the ear's trajectory which does not constrict movement, and some turns are in the parts before.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which accumulates in the chest of theirs, which does not comprehend the vein's movement, is in the major dispositions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which follows the vein's movement, you should pause at the patient's ear on the sole and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if obvious swelling appears, observe carefully the subtle space of which this is the shape of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it is in which there is little latitude, where one part is acute and the other not; and the space is of two equal sides so that it does not touch the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And then if the swelling is from born flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then you should cut subtly and make an incision there, vigorously facilitating entrance so that all the flesh is opened.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the chest of the ear, then take a subtle razor and clear that focus on a few, and then put it in the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And then if you feel the swelling in the water that the patient's turbidity has facilitated, due to the gravity of the hearing, it forces the oppression of it facilitated; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then pause in the ear, dripping with oil according to the quantity of the width of the channel which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a saucepan, boiling and powdering over the third trituration and using it; and if the ear has already been apostemed, then you should extract the water and permute it with another water which you will involve in wax that is well-roasted, until it is the aposteme cauterized; and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Maybe if there is a flow of blood, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and pause over the ear, and use another cure that restrains the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the cure of athelia, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athelia which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes, some veils are humid, some veils are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then you should hold those with tenacious or on the nail, and cut those that are spaced from their roots, and then pause over the places third-triturated.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	Maybe if pain with blood flow comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle, lance-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to burn the incisions and dry veils returning when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure of cataract that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Veils that are born in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled to cataract in its strength and hardness, and thus cataract is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Then the operation on them is that you should consider then if the cataract is proceeding in it, as it appears from the eyelid and is moved to the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make a notch above it with a width, and then clear it from the entire part facilitated until it is evacuated, and then suspend it in the nail and absolve it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Maybe if you do not prepare the incision of it, then you cannot penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then that does not harm in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the angel of it restores and incarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the deep surface, then you lift the eyelid and suspend the cataract in the nail, unless you indicate an incision, and press it throughout the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that does not harm in any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision, wash the eye with salted water; and cure the place with that which incarnates until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the cure of axcirnah in the eyelid below the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is a grayness which is engendered in the tunics of the eyelid below, and mostly it appears in children, aggravating the eyes of those and causing their catarrh to flow; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sun due to the grief that converges on them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And thus you often see them casting shadows over their faces all the time, and over their faces sleeping; and so on the eyelids of their below the humid eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of apparent convergence is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel convergence until it is apparent.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	Here is the translation:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Perhaps in the preceding cavity you find the entire code within which you reach to accumulate, because in the major deposits processes accumulate through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that humour which you have enveloped between the fingers of both hands on the affected parts before and revolve it between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust on the fissure so that the fluid does not penetrate to the vein and descends from there.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Maybe if it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, maybe that you adjust on the fissure a small facilitated humour until it accumulates; and then extract that thus as we have said; and then submerge the cloths in water and wine, and place them over the area and strengthen those humours with poultices.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus you will draw out salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maybe if there are abscesses in the affected place, then cure that with emplasters of cedar until it is healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of touching the vein.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the veins of the eyes there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those that annoy the vein and cause maladies such as assiduous tears and mollification of the eyelids and skin until it is the cause of destruction of the vein which is called touching of the vein, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suture; or with canes as you will be directed.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then it is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your right hand, and if it is converted, well; and otherwise, insert a needle in that part where there is faith of the affected area beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with faith from below, and it will be — near the edge of the eyelid where the veins are — near the veins, and pull the faith to the upper parts beneath the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then feel in the affected area beneath the eyelid where the adjusted veins are with incidental fluid of the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the faith and place it beneath the eyelid with small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then seal over the eyelid with a tent, and it will be thus like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Maybe it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because then it is diversified in the homes, because of those it is what is indicated that a great quantity should be incident on the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then feel with the fluid on the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural veins thus as it is the grossness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion on one of the two angles of the code, and then excavate that entire thing, and then adjust with a subtle scythe the two labia at the gula or faith of wool, and abstergize the blood, and make adhere what superfluously flows from the faiths over the two eyebrows for some envisioning causes, if you want to do it, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the suture of the faiths for three days or four, and then cure it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, loosen the plague's suture, and cure it with that which dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated from the sigillation of the plague and its aggregation; maybe the suture is better. Therefore, I have thus distinguished the ancient taxes of taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Maybe it is necessary to solicit about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manner in taxmir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid figure thus as myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and congregated inches according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Maybe if it is not possible to have the inches, and that is not engulfed, then take a needle in which there is thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other faith near the major lacrimal, and the faith according to the minor lacrimal, and adjust between the fingers of both hands the faiths in equality, and then elevate your hand with elevation engulfed, elevate the entire code over which it is marked thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And you adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and heal that inner part so it is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	Perhaps you should incise the abscess or your fissure, but that abscess is near the skin and it seems to be encased.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some evacuated wounds on the eyelid that are converted into scars, then cover what you have used in that wound that we have spoken of incision; perhaps suture in some cases is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat with cannons according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure that is deduced according to what has been recounted; and then by art make two cannons or two subtle asters of which length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their being less than the width of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add certain subtleties underneath what superfluously hangs from the eyelid of the eye, and construct the cannons of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and place them there for some days, because the code for the morbid structure will be negated and it will be repelled until it is seen that it will fall into place.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps it is delayed, then cut the torn places, and then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Since it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of making two cannons which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About the elevation of stinging skin on the eye with a pointed instrument when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and stinging the eyes, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle pointed instrument and place it in that thin vein of subtle flesh and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And it is the length of the veins of the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle vein below it in brief, and numb the extremities of that if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then stop the evil at its head in the tendon, and it is proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenium, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract that from under the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into alignment, and the skins will be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand into that until the skin is separated from alignment with the eyelid and the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Perhaps it is aligned and the skin is not grafted, you will align to the parts below with the vein which you have composed in that, until it is grafted into alignment of the above-mentioned passage.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you see that in the vision of the eye, because then you will graft into alignment and the vein, and you will close certain things and bind the eye, and leave the binding for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its proper place and is born over good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or that which remains until it is lengthened properly to some space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of hemorrhage which occurs in the eyelid underneath.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is hemorrhage in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted in its own, or to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of wounds or of sections or of cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this hemorrhage is natural or accidental, and it is made for consolidation of wounds or of sections or of cauterization, or for resemblance to their malformation.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	There the manner of operation on it is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and pause in it at what is between them a certain measure of drap of linen, and tie them together until they are healthy.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you use the cure of it for the causes which dry up, constriction; because if you make that return to hemorrhage worse than nothing at any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollify thus as it is fenugrec, and imbue with water in which they are cooked alta and senseless of linen, or inject diaquilon, which liquefies in some of the oils, and submerge in that measure, and cure in that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perfect in every engine that is not consolidated according to the form that was begun at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And in this operation which we have described, it is not just some correction of the alignment that does not return the shape of the place according to what was previously determined.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of hernia which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia which is made in the eyelid below, which is naturally called hernia; and it is of two kinds, natural and accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is made by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of operating on it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the upper parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into a spatulum of ample size.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if it returns to the shape of the eyelid as it should be; otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make two fissures in the lattice of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two fissures form two angles of the incision, which are made so that they converge, and be from their made angle so that when they gather, it forms the figure of theirs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh there for the quantity that is the lattice of the lower eyelid, which is sufficient to close the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of wool; and then take care of them with what we have said about soothing medicines and poultices, so that it may be healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the hernia is opened by a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure above the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously said.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of hernia whether it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of hernia, and that is in the form of various diverse knots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in such a way that it is possible to return the shape to its natural form, or close to it, and that hernia according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is solidly attached above on the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it, or stretch it towards the nail.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you make the adhesion with a subtle spatulum, which is not sharp enough to cause incisions, having obtained an obtuse angle so that the hernia is not disturbed by the operation, and remain with the spatulum that does not harm the eye in its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it excavates that adhesion with facility, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and that the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salty water in the eye, which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of linen, and pause on the eye a woolen cloth infused with white of egg, and then use it for three days as a cause of consolidative treatments so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh from the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and similar to a subtle dry cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, similar to a whitish humid congestion, which when touched, or is forced to take in the nail, is absorbed and the nail does not fix itself in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not come from the major tear duct unless they go little by little that covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of operating in the incision of it is that the hernia pauses the six fingers in the tie, and then operates on its eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the nail from the little duplication and stretches it to the separated parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and introduce it into a hair of horse or ox or of a bird, or of similar things, or of strong faith, or duplicate the extremity of the little needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with faith the nail; and stretch it to the separated parts above, and excavate the hair from the lattice of the nail which closes the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you will follow that bone from the spine into its rear.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And thus you will insert the rhinental into the lacrimal duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and remove the natural flesh of the lacrimal to prevent any continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail of the sole is extended or has a fissure, thus we have said, and then it must be excavated with a lion-shaped spatula, from which this is the form of it.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the spatula and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then insert the gutta into the wound a little salt water or dew of cypress, and let it enter another day; and then take care that this water covers inside so that it may be sanctified.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervously sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that sole, then many times this type of nail is cured with medications, and it is healed thus as I have written and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut into that, then open the wound of the patient and take a subtle lion-shaped spatula with an acute edge according to this form.
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes it is rarified and confused and enters into that root, then distill from your work in the wound with dew of cypress or dew of rose or salt water, and apply the wound another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over that operation until all that is of it is removed, but on the contrary be cautious lest an abscess forms in the wound, because then you will leave that, and take care at the beginning to form the abscess so that it may be healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate your operation on that root until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the wound for great nuisance, should be suspended with an onion; and insert that from that one part, and do not finish the insertion so that it does not insert a flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill into the lacrimal dew of rose and dew of cypress until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	About the insertion of almond-like and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some wounds on the eyes of some people are born with red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and forces them to close over the divisions beforehand and is assembled like a lattice of a balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on him is that the patient stops his head in the bandage; and then open the eyes of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient onions, and take that with a forceps or a basket; and then insert the flesh at the beginning until it is finished in the incision, and beware of the wound that does not loosen during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And thus your insertion is the one that inserts those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the insertion of the nail, or small forceps which collect according to what will be seen in the form of it, thus in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your insertion is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt water, or distill into the powder of red rose and similarly to those of corrosive medications, and put on the wound beforehand a coating of egg white until it is assured against abscess caution.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if some cause of almond-like and it is lordly sanctified with caution, and fears abscess caution, then leave the wound and take care of that abscess in water that will dissolve that abscess, and then iterate over that operation until it is healed, and similarly do to the adjusted flesh which adheres in the wound of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you will cover that which entirely cures the wound frequently by natural way or by accidental way, holding with iron, and do not put your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	About the collection of sabur in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sabur comes with red veins which are tested on the wound and prohibit its vegetation, and they develop the wound in longitude of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which there is sabur is strong and in it there is no other badness except sabur, then you collect that sabur.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to stop his head in the bandage, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a vase according to this form.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstain from the sacred hour to hour, until you see those veins are removed from the wound and are revolving.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Be careful that you do not lead the fluid into the extremities of the spleen; and if your operation is in the morning, during the sunlight, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed it, then distill the fluid into the chief green or red vein so that it is immediately absorbed, which is removed from the scales.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Perhaps it is not possible to collect it all at that hour, and then you apply a poultice to allay the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against postrema caution.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to the method that the doctor will manage until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the poultices:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of inflammation in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute burning medicine, according to the narration that precedes it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it except that you make an apostem on its maturity, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it until the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and it becomes corrupted or blackened, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named a rough head, and it is made of iron indeed, and it is the rounded head thus as to scrape what is pointed by lime or alum for subtle pointing (thus as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that over the corrupted bone location, and then revolve it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is reduced.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the location with causative desiccative and styptic remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and is separated from the body of the patient and remains for 40 days, and it does not relapse and does not become apostematous and does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering but to reduce the fissure according to the form of the nose, and according to this method: that you discover with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take a tribo according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	It is the triangular extramation of the iron, and its handle is first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then pause that over the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little with the fluid, and then revolve your hand with the tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient for as long as it takes to arrive there and you feel the bad humor going out.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the location with styptic medicines that dry thus as you have experienced it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then since the flesh and the location are indurated, then the matter that was poured out to the affected parts before returns to its origin, so it is no longer severe about the bad humor.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the fluid.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the fluid eminates in its totality and does not cause any harm or diminution, then it is necessary to evacuate the bad humor, and then follow, and then place ventosas on the cervical scars for good suction; and then pause over the fluid with a liniment made of acatra and aloe and insula and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice over the fluid with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take drapes of the lions' many powders, and each drape is duplicated in four places; and make them from those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then pause those one over the other according to the quantity of which the fluid has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard, strict structure; and iterate the ventosas with good suction on their scars; and then remove the ventosas and leave the fluid to stretch during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Perhaps meanwhile the ligament is mollified, then it is necessary that it be very stretched.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament during the day and night thus as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the fluid has already been reduced, good, and otherwise, then iterate the poultice with powders and structure and ventosas until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the tunica uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and then it is prominent and proceeds outward beyond the eyelids thus as a grain of radish, and its form is arranged for that, you want to incise, then the operation is thus as we have recommended, that you introduce the needle at the root of the uvea of the lower part below the upper part, and then put another needle in which it has double filum of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the place of the double filum and raise it from that part of the uvea in the circle of the needle, and strengthen that much.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the bitter substance and place it under the hollow of the ankle, infused in a white album, and let it penetrate so that the thread is freed from the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the ankle well in this way, so that the wound is comforted and the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some vegetables are applied to the entire affected area around the circle of cloth next to the ankle, and then it is pierced by a subtle spatula that reaches the perimeter of the ankle, and corrects the albugineous humidity, and descends the ankle and enters as much as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This ailment that is called ulcer does not exist, but rather it is a sane thing which is adjusted in the ankle resembling descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The best way to operate on it is to make the ulcer sit over the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cloth in both hands more than two parts and mauled until you see the sane thing pervading the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and the light remains, and the ulcer sees the causes thus as it was.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared for descent to the sane thing in that water which we have said, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and do so over the panniculus circle surrounding a small part of the continuity of the conjunctiva in the corneal crown (in the place you look), until the sane thing is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the ankle hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured of the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending water of the ankle.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have said the species of the water in the division and what is convenient to pierce with a declarative sermon, then that secondly according to the sanity.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then it is necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands over a copper plate and bind the dry ankle with a tight knot.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then stop near the eyelid of the dry ankle with your left hand, if the ankle in which there is water is the left ankle; or with your right hand, if the ankle is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the alum, if the ankle is left; or with your left hand, if the ankle is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then stop the extremity of the alum near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the album of the ankle on the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then pour the alum into a vessel and revolve your hand in that.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the album of the ankle and feel that the alum has already been conveyed to cause a void.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the alum be taken to the perimeter of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the ankle; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the ankle through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then stop the alum into the place where the water is, and then you will attract it downwards a little while, and thus if the water descends as much as possible, then you will see the ulcer which is above where the ankle reveals its sight as much as possible, and the alum in the dry ankle.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest a little; thus if the water has descended, then you stop that other while before the alum is touched.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the alum with facility, and revolve with your hand a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and in that lava the ankle deduces; and then stop the ankle coated or stopped or infused with oil rosated and album of cloth and ligature with that ankle.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we, those who are of our time, stop above that method written in the album of cloth.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your alum to the instrument of the ankle for its hardness — because it is a part of the homes where the ankle is very hard —, then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called albared from which this is the form:.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus pierce with that conjunction, and do not extend your hand in the trachea, and it is not so that you make a way to the alum location subtly.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the alum according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you receive the compliment of your work, be prepared for the ulcerative dormitory descending faintly in which it sleeps over the dry back in a dark mansion, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And stop in the nature of that water so that its nature is lined up, and do not move the dry head to the right or left part of anything.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	It should be treated according to its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And also extract that darkness from the cloudy mist, and examine the clear vision, and find some causes, and then return it to its treatment within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not cover that you make this at the time of the treatments or almost return the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having covered that you remove it for so that the water pours out gradually and strongly, with great and violent flow.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Perhaps it happens that an abscess forms slowly, then cover that you extract the fluid from within seven days, and correct what is there that causes the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you have freed the vision of it and paused over the face of its orifice to regulate the evacuation of it, that it may be discharged for some days, existing in the cloudy mist.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then you will be freed from that cloudy mist gradually and convert into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in the treatment it is not excused to omit some vigils of vision, and then you will be hardened about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And already we have arrived at the knowledge of some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that they made a hole in the Ayrac mountain, perforated in which water is succeedingly flowing out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Perhaps emperor, I have not seen anything like this in our land, which has perfected water, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancient writers; and it is possible that this is a new thing.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Magdaan, so that they may be above those which ignore them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangular shape, the sharp extremity thus as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose are born diverse adjusted flesh growths of which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of many feet, or a foot polyp; and this illness is called polyp because it has a resemblance to that foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion's flesh of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover that you make the evil depart from your hands and place it in the sun, and clean the nostrils of it, and pierce the thin skin of those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the divided parts before, and then insert that which you have comprehended of those I have spat out subtly from one part into another so that you know that all the flesh is restored; for if it remains of it any cause of which the abscess is possible, then you will find that with one of the subtle instruments facilitated to remove any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Perhaps it happens that an abscess forms slowly, then you pause at the one that covers; or it is of the malignant abscesses, then you touch and cauterize that within so that it may be absolved sound and all the cavities are restored.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then you will be purged in the nose, then you agree to inject air or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Perhaps it happens that the nose is opened and of its processes humidity enters into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	Perhaps it happens that the humidity does not penetrate as it covers, then you know that it is flesh wounds in the purulent ulcers of the nostrils which have not been absolved.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore then you cover that you introduce faith in the one which is some grossness, and anoint in the foot anointed, and pause between each nut the quantity of the said or month, and engender the evil and introduce one extremity of the faith into the nostrils with the ray or at another cause which is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And since that aura is made, which attracts the sieve's ornament into the channels of the nostrils, and it is established over the sieve's globe, because many vigils resemble this action in making the infants at the schools, and it is a gentle cause for one who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then you pause the two extremities of the faith, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then you administer serrature of flesh with the anointed ones that are in the faith, and make it so that you know that the flesh is already in the anointed ones of the faith.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then you extract the faith, and pause in the nose then abstracting the healthy one with a calm water, and make it so for three days or more until all that is corrupt of the flesh is removed.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Perhaps it happens that the treatment is exhausted, use that one instead.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to cleanse and purify the nostrils in which oils and medicines are distilled.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if you make a small box of silver or copper, which looks like a little lantern or small container, and the meat seems similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the handle of the instrument should be flat and uncovered; which should be held in the back of it, with which you hold that which you want to suck out of its oil or that which you want to remove from the underlying causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these ingredients are precious: a recipe of castor oil infusion, of white hawthorn, of ginger, and saffron threads, of long pepper, of scorpion's tail, of petun stone anointed with spice. You confound with the juice of bladder and cabbage, and thus make pills, and a pill is tempered with tepid water, and is given to the nostrils of the patient lying in bed.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They are born naturally at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Polyps grown are born naturally at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned in several days within which a polyp is legion regarding its observation.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause on the area or apply a cautery or medicine that burns, which is in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the insertion is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it has become putrid, hard, of dark color and of little sensation, then do not touch that iron quart which is cancerous aposteme; because polyps grown have inserted this aposteme within due to great malice towards that which it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the insertion is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and insert them without fear, and cure the area with water that exits and constricts until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you achieve a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer benefits in that operation unless in some homes.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with holy blood, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and afterwards cure it until it is healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is clear that you should extract each part of its apparent code until nothing remains.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and on those sprinkle holy dragon's powder and apply a triple layer of emplastrum diafinicon, or some other consolidating emplasters, and leave that liat for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with another emplaster, and leave it until the flesh is well-scraped, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Perhaps the manner of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles thus as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread thus as you and I have made known.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Polyps grown have found some homes in the divided parts of their lips, some apostemes hard resembling fat errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore it is clear that you convert the lips and find each of those hard parts of the whole, and then remove the flesh with umpliscas, and afterwards strengthen the holy place until it is well-restrained, and then wash it with a gentle agreement and cure the area with water that is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	About the insertion of adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Many polyps are born over the adjusted gum flesh which the ancient physicians called albumin, therefore it is clear that you suspend it with onion or hold it with forceps and insert it beneath the root, and let the healthy blood flow or the holy blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause on the holy place well-strengthened or other stipulated powders or exciting ones.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	About the root of iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and those of the forehead and between the adjusted gums, scorched and rough, lichenous, and some polyps are blackened and are made citrine or green until the gum is corrupted by water and the teeth are lichenous.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your knees and place their head on your thigh, and gently touch their teeth to those which appear to be affected by similar pains and causes, so that none of them are removed without a reason, and it is done for the blackness and bitterness and other inward afflictions.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if it is established that it is in those of the beginning of the reason, well; and otherwise, then you will iterate the reason over those to another day and second and third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth have need of many roots of diverse forms and shapes according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason the roots of the teeth are those which are separated from the partition of the teeth, and another root is that which is rough among the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots you should prepare those which will be seen soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Because you should cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity and delay in total extraction of it, for there is no cause that supplants the evacuation of it when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which is the excuse for the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, because the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, you should firmly be certain which is the painful tooth, for many evacuations alleviate the pain and convince that it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Then how do you certify which is the painful tooth, and what you know to be, then it is necessary that you scarify around the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gingiva of the entire partition, and then mauk those in the teeth said, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then apply a strong hold with great force for good eloquence or strong stoppage, and pause the head of the patient between the teeth, which holds that they do not move, and then draw out the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so that you do not shake it, nor does the major pain of the patient cease.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place that there in the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing out of that tooth and strengthen those in the extremity of a subtle root so that it is not trinkled at the time of your construction upon it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you operate with expertise in the scarification around the entire part of the gingiva and guard your strength so that you do not shake it and remove the partition of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what the ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity about the extraction of theirs, lest they do not administer what we have recommended; for many evacuations come to the bad homes with great difficulties which are more difficult than those that are extracted, and the roots of theirs remain entirely, or some of those, or that you extract those from the osses of the mandible thus as many evacuations have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the extraction of it is washed with the mouth in eight days or agreed upon salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if you find fluxes of blood for a while, thus as many evacuations find, then apply some quantity of wax and asperegys on the wound, and if it does not confer that wax, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and subtle holders which are used to extract the tooth at the beginning is of long extremity, short handle and large, so that they are not doubled when one has to operate with those.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And thus as many times of large handle until when you hold them in your hands they are not doubled, they are short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And there are made of Indian iron instruments with straight extremities, and in the extremities of those are teeth which ones enter into the others and hold for strong construction, and some evacuations have extremities like the beak of a bird called cicnia, so it is held, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxvi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and dislocation of the bones of the injured mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth which is stuck for some reason, then it is necessary that you pause on the spot with a border for one day or two until the spot is mollified; and then insert the instrument or holders with extremities which are assembled like the beak of a bird called cicnia or guanta, in the form of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The external limbs are similarly affected by cold humors that infiltrate them like lime or alum.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey your own judgment in these forceps or tenaculas, then it is necessary to operate on the affected area and dissect all the flesh and entrails, using an instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let the thick outer layer of skin be briefly and gently removed, and not be swollen so that it does not become constricted.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if the affected area is not opened up, well; and if not, help yourself with other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular-shaped external limb in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle external limb.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form suitable for the following.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in scraping of teeth; because juvenation is done with this instrument which is assembled to a large hook, and this is the form.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular-shaped external limb curved or short, which has some thickness, and not be swollen so that it does not become constricted.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing you know is that the instruments for teeth are moved thus and similarly to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to their materials according to what they signify, the operation and various illnesses; because they are among the illnesses that the ancients did not diagnose nor pause with their own instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Moreover if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are constricted, or if they are porous, then be careful about that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be some small thickness gradually, and let it be tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is opened up; and then restore the place with medicines conveniently adapted to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Moreover if there is small porosity in the bone, then scrape that porosity and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, and especially when they protrude in women, and especially in venerable old men; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not attached to another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or ligament it, then root out that one; moreover if it is not annexed to another tooth, then you excavate that with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a boar's mouth, and make it sharp like Indian steel from the external pointed edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your excavation be in which you excavate that one in three days for the durability of the tooth, and that it not be joined to another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to lime, then lime that one with lime of Indian steel of which this is the form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of Indian steel and sharp marguez; and let it be of many small points thus like lime on which they are made agulhas, on which the tooth is limed a little at a time in many days with facilitation, so that no other tooth is joined and falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then file it away in the fig tree, and scrape that one with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is constricted and touches the tongue, then it is necessary that you file away that one until the aspersion of that fraction is stopped and enclosed, and let it be applied so that the tongue does not touch it nor the speech does not corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When concussion and removal occur through percussion or through falling, and the illness cannot be strengthened over what it affects, and you have treated that one with styptic medicines, and your cure has not been of value, then so that they do not fall out in those that are strengthened with gold foil and not silver, because silver turns greenish and is porous after several days, but gold at no time becomes muddy.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gold foil be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosity of the gold foil between two teeth, or if one or many, until it reaches the web of the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then iterate the process until the part of which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not loose.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your constriction be the one that strengthens the veins of the teeth that do not decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then remove the superfluous fibers from the tooth with forceps or tongs, and add those to any place in the gesture, and convert them into occult between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that it does not cause lesion on the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Then release that thus strayed cum Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	Maybe it is dislocated or ruptured, strengthen it or them with another tooth in such a manner that it is entirely at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two decayed, thus as it happens to these joined ones.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one returns a tooth or two to their proper place, and they are re-attached thus as we have recommended, and they remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not make anything unless you are skilled artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some evacuated are apt for some cause of the cow's bones, and it is made from their form as a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the incision of the ligament which you see in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which you find below the tongue sometimes is or is naturally in the one that men use, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound that has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, his existing head being in the tie; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	Maybe there is some hardness or induration, and it has been steady for consolidation of the wound, then you make an incision and dissect according to the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fracture in the pincer of the flesh and that you dissect here with great care and avoid a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with warm water or with wine or with cool water; and then pause beneath the tongue, licking; thus it is customary to hold the patient beneath the tongue at some time so that another wound is not consolidated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Maybe there is an accident of blood flow, pause at the vitriolic place thrice; maybe if the blood comes, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then that cure is for other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an abscess forms, similar to a small tumor, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnificent until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth in front of the light and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you find it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that quartan crisis.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on him, and incise with a subtle spatula, and incise all around; and if blood comes out at the time of your operation, then you pause for three hours, thus it is vitriolic, until the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have treated it with a complement of him, until it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure that with another cure adapted to this until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two ears and of that which is nothing in the gullet and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find in the gullet a godat, so they are glands which are assembled together, which occur before and are called two ears, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; beforehand let it be until it matures, and then you can operate on it, or it will be broken for itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radish, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on him is that you consider, during your operation, if it has already rested the abscess of his cautious remedy or if it has been diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in the tie, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands before the tongue beneath with a noble instrument of which this is the form.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or copper, and it should be subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then as you press with your tongue and it shows you the aposteme, and cut above that same tender spot, then take nine and place it in the amulet, and pull it to the parted areas as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you extract from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, thus that the orifice of each one of them is in the interior of the other, very pointed, which is of iron indeed inbuilt.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient's gums with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, apply cold water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to that of the stopping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it until it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some evacuated abscesses in the gulley other apostemes like those two golden veins, and incise them according to what you have said and dictated in the incision of two veins in a circle.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already medicated a woman with an aposteme which was born in her gulley, the aposteme tended to a dark color, of little sensation, which had almost closed her gulley, and the woman breathed with great stricture, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was perverted unto death if she had stayed like that for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the aposteme had so much swelled that it had formed two ramps until they emptied through two conduits.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then you carefully dissected it and placed it in one of their holes, and pulled it, and extracted from the large portion, and then you incised that which comprehended the other conduit, and then you opened the patient's mouth, and comprehended their tongue, and then you placed the hole in that aposteme.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you removed a large part of it, and there did not flow from it except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the gulley of that woman was absolutely free, and she began to drink water, and then took viands, then you did not cease to incise that aposteme much because it was prolonged for a long time, and the aposteme succeeded in its place, which incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you healed it and cauterized the gulley of it, then thus of addiction; and then you walked and did not know that God did that miracle for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 38.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a hollow when it is apostematous.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hollow is catarrhed, and it is apostematous and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with that which we have said in the division, and it does not conform to your cure, and sometimes it happens that the aposteme remains hidden from it and is subtle, then it is necessary that you incise what is added round; and if it is at its length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its sentiment, then it is necessary that you make an incision of it, because there is fear about the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you sometimes do it according to the method that you have said of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient seize with your tongue and press with an instrument of which proceeds in its form and then places the hole in the new one, and pulls it down and incises it with one of two instruments which are said in the incision of two veins.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you incise more, you will let the blood flow out.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two veins, and cure it until it is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, it is necessary that you use art in the cauterization of it with fear, and the method of cauterizing it is not only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on the tender spot, and then press with your tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and conforms to that living cause, and pause it not sparse nor subtle, and fills the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extraction of the cavity where the medicine is placed, like a hollow cylinder of ray, and place the instrument in the medicine on the valve, and the patient spits over the shoulder cloth so that corrosive saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not obstruct the internal medicine, so that it does not impede the gullet of the patient.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then put your hand in the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for a space of half an hour until it becomes disinfected and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a thread and envelop it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the thread in the medicine, and introduce the ray into the thread through a canal until the thread adheres to it, and do this many times until you obtain what you want from the cauterization of the uva, and then leave it so that it will cicatrize and fall off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then apply the cauterization by burning in a circle on the uva with thread embedded in border, and notify that which is in the circuit of the patient's medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand by embrocation, and remove the gargling symptoms until it is sanitized.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this species of cure is more salvific than incision and longer in duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some wounded eyes are cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of theirs, into a bag, and let them steep in wine vinegar, and boil; and the bag should be well sealed, and place it in the middle of the bag a tube, upon which is placed an instrument made of silver or copper according to this manner; it is done with silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then introduce the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uva through the pipe, so that the uva is not too obstructed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then iterate over those many wounded places until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the commencement of the advent of apostemas, because it would too much adjust in the apostema, and do not think that you are doing that, but rather declare the apostema of the patient's caution.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Maybe if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the patient's closed mouth, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closure of the mouth prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and that which adheres to the gullet and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many wounded places adhering to the gullet or spine of feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you will extract what is apparent from those, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone in the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the gullet.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the gullet, you will make the patient vomit by inducing that the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the gullet will be forced out by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or radish of lettuce or a dry loaf of bread; or take a piece of dried seaweed sponge, and tie it strongly with thread, and then pass the patient through that, so that as they spin and are extracted, then they will be forced out.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And maybe take an eel and bind it with strong thread, and place it on the table and afterwards it will be extracted; or take a porpoise and afterwards extract the intestines and afterwards extract the entrails.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Maybe if you do not force out those causes which we have discussed, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is more gross than a small ray, and in the extremity of the patient's cavity which you introduce into their gullet with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the old man raises his head to them, and beware that the touch of the old bones of the gullet, so that it does not injure the body or that which pierces the bone or spine, or that the doctor places his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Maybe the emperor orders that the patient who introduces himself is freed, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pierces in them, and pulls his hand with the instrument on them, all according to the quantity which is prepared until it is forced out.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of blood congealed and annexed to the gullet.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When blood is treated with the aforementioned medicine in the division of the cure and not comforted, consider then the patient's language in the Golayro's soliloquy, since you have comprehended the tongue of the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the blood treatment, extract it with a small knife or subtly handle it with delicate gestures.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's soliloquy, and place a fiery iron in the cavity of the cannula, and make as many turns (until the blood treatment is dead and removed from the soliloquy) and abstain from the patient for the entire day of water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full vessel of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not transgress from that cause and mix the water for an hour, then another on their hand, because the blood treatment is just as sensitive to the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Moreover, if it is not forgotten what you have recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida through the instrument that you have recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do it, because it is four times a year.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another manner of operation in the suffumigation of that, which is to take a pipe on which are ignited carbonized coals and the pipe is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a tube; and then descend under the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood treatment, because the blood treatment is changed four times.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from the patient's drinking, and eat salty foods and soups, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen should not be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which the blood treatment of the soliloquy is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed on the soliloquy, and its extremity is similar to a beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which is sharpened with a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not leave.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are many special kinds, of many manners, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs for two manners, one of which is for the species of abscesses in their measures; and for that which you comprehend of the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second manner is proper to the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs on the buttocks; and the abscess in the carnal place occurs differently from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each one of them has its judgment for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And many abscesses are such that they cover that they are not perforated but rather matured by the sania in those or complete them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses cover that they are wounded when they are crossed, and they do not mature according to their compliment, just like abscesses that are proper to the joints, because an abscess when it has a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can pour out what is in its circuit, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it is a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess proper to a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, you will not harm the principal member; or it is proper to the buttocks, therefore perforate what has not matured, and do not cover that they perforate crudely, from incomplete digestion, but rather that which is proper to the buttocks, so that you do not pour out its essence and it is elongated to the divided parts of the buttocks, and it is a fistula, or it is done in the term of it that it is not healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Many cover that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it matures.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the ceasing of fever, and then the diminution of the rigor and of the pulse, and the acuity of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And because you cover that you know the perforation will occur in the place where the pus is beneath the abscess and where the pus comes from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And perforation is sometimes through the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the ligaments, of the cords of the nerves, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the aposteme is in a fleshy location, it is advisable to delay perforation until it is confirmed that digestion is taking place according to the usual process, as we have previously stated; for if you perforate at that time, it will prolong the body of the patient's disease and make his lips ulcerous and the depth of the wound more putrid.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes apostemes are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or the condition of the body, or according to the necessity of which the affected member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer small perforations, and in large apostemes a great and wide perforation or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the apostemes.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other times of the apostemes in which it is necessary that the coding be overcome and be enclosed, when it is done thus, it will be in a term that already exists, just like one who accumulates in drops of dubellum and of bubbles.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle, just like the apostemes of the veins.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of theirs in which a round section is administered and a lunar section, and they resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Sometimes that which cannot be seized thus like the superficial apostemes of lions, it is necessary to perforate with a superficial perforation, or to plane only on the surface.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the aposteme is large and has collected much sania, that you perforate it and do not think to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part of it, and then you apply oil to the aposteme until another day, and then you extract a larger part, and then you make many evacuations according to gradation until it is fully purged.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And it is especially so if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved to expel the sania, and it will quickly kill the patient, and you will operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful in this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these apostemes, because you will cleanse the wounds and consider therefore if the wound of the aposteme is small, or it is a flat section, then you will administer the remedies of oil or of anti-irritant coto; and if the aposteme is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then it is necessary that you pause in some tract until they come to an end.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the aposteme a part of the coding is abscessed or has concaved into the circuit, then it is necessary that you complete it with anti-irritant coto oil or with a thread of drap from flax, just like when you have treated pans or razizos, with humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then proceed to cure what is necessary to remove the engorgements until it is sanitized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Sometimes if there is a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and wine in which you mix a thread of flax, and pause that over the location of the blood flow, many evacuations.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Sometimes if the blood flow persists, then it is necessary that you administer a regimen and cure, and powder with those that have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	Sometimes if it is in winter time, and the location of the aposteme is a location of many nerves, then it is necessary that you apply poultices with wine and oil, and pause those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the locations are fleshy, then it is necessary that you pause poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be cool until the third day, as we have said, and then it is necessary that you dislodge the aposteme and cleanse it and administer the cure of what is convenient to it until it is sanitized.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus it is necessary to know the cure of apostemes universally, sometimes according to the way of distinction already said about each aposteme in which manner it is the way of curing it by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of apostemes which come in the coding of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the coding of the small head, little apostemes, and so of species of nodes which contain tunics that are at their fact; and the species of theirs are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are pungent, and of those that contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain humidity similar to pores, and they resemble them; and of those that are lapideous, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those that are not fearful, as one must extract those that do not cause contradictory archeria.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you spread them with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if there is moisture that retains humidity, then separate it with a dry cloth according to the length for superficial separation in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	It begins at the separation of the line of B, entering to the line of G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any of those causes of total, because many weakened returns, if it remains from some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that plague and let it enter another day, because I corrode everything so that it removes all from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink again and thirdly if it is indicated for him, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the plague with Egyptian ink until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this method:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	It has the form of a cross, and cut between the two lips of the incision and scrape everything from that entire partition, and extract your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	Perhaps if you have made a mistake, then do the opposite, so that you can rectify it primarily.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the lapified abscess of incision and cure according to what you have said; and incision over the lapified abscess is less grievous, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some old women know about these abscesses which are on the head of some men who have none of that humidity; which causes it because you have incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus with a rough, harsh, white, which could not be pierced, and if someone has touched that percussion, it would plague.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Perhaps in the other accidental abscesses on the head there is not this capital, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and devour the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those parts from the lower part of their skin, so that the body of the wound is alleviated at the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then heal those things with what is convenient for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula which occur on the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many weakened returns are caused by these abscesses on the neck and in the axillae and in the joints; and some weakened returns occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur on the neck, and many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own proper tunic, and thus like in the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many, because some of them are lapified, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find with good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of that which is manifest is similar to the color of the codena, and it is mauled throughout the entire part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not preoccupied, because you incise it with superficial incision from above the part down to the line of G., entering the line of B., and scrape that entire part, and extend two lips of the codena on one side, or many sides if there is need of those, thus as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that neither the vein nor nerve should be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And it is more careful that you do not adjust your hand in incision, or quiet the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then pause in the vetriol plaster or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and strengthen the plague, and let it enter until it repauses the acuity of the abscess and mollifies the plague and begins to be puerperal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is absorbed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate if there is some cause of the other small scrofula, so incise them and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, because then you should not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Besides, because it seems that you have made a double strong faith and leave it until it falls by itself without being noticed.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound of the cut thigh which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and take care to cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that entire scab, then be sure to adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much as possible so that no excess flesh remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Perhaps you see that excess flesh has remained due to the greatness of the scab, be sure to understand how to incise the root of it, and separate it and administer a suture, and that is what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And in those scabs that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the place of maturation of it, and stop the perforation of what you see is the pus at the bottom of the ulcer, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer perforation, with warm ointments and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then take care to apply an ointment of generating flesh inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	About the section of the pillow of the accidental aposteme next to the goulard.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They dislodged these abscesses from this section in the pillowy swelling, and we did not see anyone in our land who had made it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon about those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Perhaps in the men who have had an accident, be sure that the extraction of the pillowy swelling is avoided, because for that reason it will not be made quickly, so that all the veins and major parts of the thigh are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Perhaps in those who have abscesses burst in the mouth or goulard or two aurelia, when the badness is not in the cane, be sure to use the section of pillowy swelling to flee from the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then be sure when we want that, to incise the pillowy swelling beneath three circles of the circles of the pillowy swelling, or four with a small section for the latitude in what is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of the blood which are there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then be sure that he extends the cord of the goulard with an onion, and then inserts the cord inside so that it reaches the canal, perhaps to avoid the blood vessels if you see them because of some other cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cleft according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the relaxation of what is of that excess matter which is of the disrupted and for the abortion of the void.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then the wound will be open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew that alone to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow inside so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but that you see that some of these apostemes have already pillowy-swollen the goulard of the thigh, and the thigh has come to death, and its wing is between- cut, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the thigh may breathe on the place of the wound for some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason I command to leave the wound open until the evil of the badness is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then I command thus the wound, and take care of it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my metaphors, is that a servant held a knife and put it in the goulard of his thigh and incised with one part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the healing of it, and I buried the mungent thus as it is buried by the dead, and discovered the wound and buried the blood which was issuing from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I must confess that it had not incised a vein nor guided, and the wind was issuing from the wound, and I took care of it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not accuse the servant if he does not return to the void, and then some days returned to the administration of their own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the pillowy swelling there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the section on the abscess that occurs in the goulard beforehand, and it is called hernia of the goulard.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named hernia of the goulard is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accident is caused by two manifold forms of which one resembles swollen nodes, and the other form resembles an abscess made by arterial node inflammation, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not cover the surface of the tumor with iron except in one that is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate with the aforementioned, and if you find it resembles swollen nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise thus with the nodes, and extract what contains the pus and serum; and otherwise, then the entire tissue is scrutinized, and you carefully cure the area that requires healing until it is healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are many species and I have already said all the species of theirs in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it covers how I recommend distinguishing the difference between a node and an abscess with surface doubtfulness.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pains until the inflammation of the excess is reduced; and it is a complete putrid decay that when it ceases, the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a node is not heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that thick cloudy liquid which is in its own proper sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a boil and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, whether they are fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore it covers, when you approach the cure of a node, that you expose and inquire into its beginning with instrumental stirring which is called introgression, according to how you will find its form in the chapter that is apropos to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the humid place which you find in the abscess, and you rotate the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the bottom.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and finally extract the introgression and consider what is left in the remnants of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise on the surface section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if in the remnants of the introgression there is no humidity, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut above it with a crosswise incision having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus you will instruct, and suspend that which is incised, and excavate the bottom of all parts to facilitate, and guard the skin or sac, if possible, above that and extract that sania from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many things are seen ending there, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if none of the causes remain, little or much, the node returns according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the plague with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and pause over that which sits as a cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you cut the two lips of it and cure it with what surrounds it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsatile, then you touch and fill the place of three tractions that are vitriol and let it stand for two days or for three until the plague is purged and the inflammation of the wound repauses; and finally return to incise what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of necessary instrumental stirring in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of introgressions, and they are of three species, which of those is large, and of those is medium, and of those is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of large introgression is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of medium introgression is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small introgression is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Thus they are made of iron, of alloy, of well-shaped extremities, so that they fasten the instrument in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of experiences, and they are named "albered", and one of those is called "berid".
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three species, because of those is large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of large experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of medium experience, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of small experience, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and buboes, so that among them are of the bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are often red and swollen, like large ulcers on the joints that have become inflamed, and are caused by critical humor or by iron, or by copper, or by silver; And the worst is when they are caused by critical humor.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are often the experience of black plum, which ones believe that for those there have been opened abscesses in the cavity of which they are reflected, that are reflected upwards with their levity in those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species, because some of them have long channels, and others narrow ones, and others broad ones, according to the quantity of the matter of the abscess and the structure of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of a large experience of plum:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of a narrower experience of plum:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of a small experience of plum:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ulcers are of many species, because some of them have simple channels, which ones have a single curvature only, and they are of three species: large, small, and narrow.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their ulcers are round, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those ulcers have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And their ulcers have three curvatures, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these things are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple ulcer, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a narrower simple ulcer:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple ulcer, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large round ulcer:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a narrower round ulcer, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small round ulcer, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a narrower ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small ulcer having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a narrower ulcer having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small ulcer having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels that are used to cut and scrape the nodes and apostemes, and they are of three species, because some are large, narrower, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a narrower scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those are which ones have been made sharp and the other extremities not-sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather for making a gentle incision on the nodes to avoid the fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be comforted and tranquilized a little before the adjustment, which adjusts away from the excoriation of the aposteme.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of emollients, and they are of three species: large, narrower, and small, like veils.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large emollient:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of a narrower emollient:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of a small emollient:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are caused by critical humor and are similar to the rays that come from it, and they make alkaline.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity of the pointed spatula that is hidden and in that curve to the divided parts and before, when you want, like vessels.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which ones are adapted between the fingers to perform the perforation of the apostemes and do not harm the patients, and they are of three species: large, narrower, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventouses which ones absorb the flow of blood, and they are of three species; large, narrower, and small; their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are caused by critical humor, round and with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of ventouses are large, narrower, and small, so that they absorb the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, they do not use them to absorb blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy places, like on the muscles of the arms and thighs, and on the muscles of the chest, and of the abdomen, and of the groin, and similarly to those of the fleshy muscles.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some veins are made of those other small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; for which the blood is absorbed when it is made by phlebotomy, or by cutting a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some veins are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of the breasts of men which ones are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some veins are swollen in the breasts of some men who have the compliment of sleeping with women, and they have swollen breasts, and they are similar to the breasts of women, and Roman apostemes, wounds.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to that one who has it, cover what is inflamed in the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then thoroughly clean the entire affected area, and fill the ulcer with incarnate medicinal plaster, and adjust the two lips of the ulcer in a circular manner, and cure that which is inside.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its greatness, thus it extends to the women, then it will be divided into two equal sections resembling a lunar figure, from which each one is contained in the other, until the major line contains the minor according to this form, from line B to line G. And then clean the channel that is between the two lips of the ulcer, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which covers the inflammation of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then cover the ulcer with cotton submerged in corrosive liquid and let it corrode what is rough from the graysness, and then cure that which is inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the perforation of abscesses that occur below the navel.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that occur below the navel are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a fluid that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity cover what is inflamed in a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is evacuated from the abscess of the healthy one, then you complete it with much cotton and leave it inside for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cotton should be steady and cured in a convenient wrapping according to what is needed, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of knots, and of scrofula, then you dissect above that thus as we have said in the section about scrofula, including.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	Perhaps the ulcer is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it the cautery according to what we have previously stated about that.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	About the section of abscesses that occur through arteria or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken, and the channel is consolidated which is above that, then many veins occur with abscess. And signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through the artery, it is long aggregated in the region of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the veins.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is through the vein is recognized by the obvious signs of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section about this abscess is erroneous, and it increases in that which is below the wings, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore cover that its cure with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, cover that it should be evacuated.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Perhaps about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, dissect in the channel section at length; and then open the section with an inch and then open the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle above that agulha and make it penetrate until the other side, and strengthen the artery with double filament in two places, — which causes you to have a syringe in extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer cure to that which is generated poor until the ligaments relax; and then cure it with convenient wrappings according to what is needed until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess by section of vein, then cover that you hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess in the channel, and then introduce the needle below the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double filament until you extract from the other side, and then tie the abscess with good ligament according to what has been said to you about the ligament of the grapevine of two parts at two extremities of the filament.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Perhaps you fear that you will extract the filament, then introduce the thread with that needle below all the abscess from the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until when you sit what is in it, then you dissect the superfluity of the channel, and let that which is of it be freed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then stop on the pillow that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is done with warm compresses and poultices until it is healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on abscesses which occur due to twisting of nerve roots.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, abscesses occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in the nerves when they occur in their percussion or occur due to superfluous struggle, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done in the muscles of the patient's joints or ankles, or in any place where the joints are weakened.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the major dispositions of their own and when it is straitened with vehemence, it is felt in the patient as a similar stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess gathered in the chest of the body, and therefore the codena (cod liver oil?) is administered, and it is weakened throughout the entire affected area and does not reach the parts above nor below.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So it is clear that those who are in the joints do not think that they are being invaded by iron, because their strong endeavour is against contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More, he who is in the head or forehead feels the cod liver oil in a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	More, if it is a small abscess, then you have the forces and abolish the root of that.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it in a hook, and excavate that, and then stop that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 50.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of abscesses that occur from the humor that occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It happens to some people who have worn-out stomachs and in other parts of the body of those whose humors are called fungal because of similarity with fungi, of which the root is subtle and·in the head of that it is large; and already their lips are converted, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in their belly there were two humors which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white humors, of small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already their lips were turned inward and were split, and moisture flowed from that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I have dissected them and attributed it to the one in whose feet there were 18 ulcers. and the other who had six ulcers.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in their dissection is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of their humor is white, humid, with subtle root; then you dissect them with a broad spatula, and be in your presence with caution, because many worn-out stomachs expel much sacred matter; and if you want to cauterize the sacred matter, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and timid, beware of dissection with iron; more then take a recently made poultice of lead, and strengthen it on that humor, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust it in the structure of the lead wire; thus, do not cease strengthening the large lead poultice that is in the humor, until it is abolished and falls through its own struggle.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	More, if it is of large root, then in its dissection there is some cause of fear and of pale, and mainly in the one who is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	More, it is possible that you dissect the death of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healthy.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not attempt to dissect the humor which is of dark color, of little feeling, of lazy regard, because that is almost cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I find remembrance of cancer in this way also.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Prominence of the navel is done for many causes; or for fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and sometimes of it the fabric or intestine according to what emerges from other ruptures; or for sacred matter that flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or for constricted ventilation in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	More, if it is for fissure of the ciphac and for ulceration of the fabric, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it has a lion's pain, and then appears with diverse symptoms.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for egress of the intestine, then the situation of that in the water that we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and as you take that in the ties of the occultated ones, and then returns; and strongly it is in the water so, and it is magnified much by the introit of bath and vehement struggle.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	More, if it is for humidity, then it is a lion and not occultated when you take it with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then do so with questioning signs that appear as dark-red spots declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is gentle.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the artery, or of a vein, or due to windiness; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because in that there is fear and pain, just as it is written in the chapter where he said about abscesses due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold their sieving well, and it should be extended straight; and then you will feel with your hand in the circle of the entire navel, and then command them to stand bent between their thighs above the sieving, and then circle around the space of the navel above the area where you felt with your hand; and then extend the greatness of the abscess to the upper parts in a large quantity; and then place it in the circle with a strong or weak hand, according to the decent manner of the liar.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then you will uncover the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert the aforementioned finger into that index and you will feel the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded it through the ligament, then you extract the excessive and impel the intestine to the inner parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the membrane, then take it in a grasp; and you will remove its excesses.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that motion, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circle where you felt around the abscess in a manner of crosses, which make them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts above the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh falls and it will close by itself; or remove that which is subtle and it will close, and then cure that part which needs to be cleansed so that it may be healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess thus as we have said and expel the blood or humidity, which you will find in it, and then cure that part which needs to be cured and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of a type of cancer and in what manner it is via the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid it in the cure so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is generated in the marrow and caution of its cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And I will show you the ancient teachings that some rooted cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus as of cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and its similar members allocated to extract all that, and especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is ancient and large, it does not matter that you take possession of it, because you will not be able to heal from that ulcer nor have seen another, nor that it has reached that point.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is that which is allocated thus as we have said, it is that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black bile some rooted cancers, and then you will know that, if it is touched with a full manifest recovery.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which is located the operation, and then prohibit in the crossing of the veins which need to be taken to that; and then concave from all parts of the code a good perexcrutiation so that no root cause of it remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that leakage, and express the places, and absterge the gross blood all at your hand or with an instrument at which it is possible for you to use the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have made counterflow of gross blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood ceases, and then cure that with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the Cure of Hydropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of solitary altitudes, and it does not approach with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypochondriacs, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of hydropsy timpanist with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been debilitated, or is in another bad hydropsy, thus as it is in the entire belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	When you see the patient has an excess of vertiginous humor, and it's not another illness but only hydropic, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of operation is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister presses their extreme belly with their hand, while injecting water into the parted perineum, and then takes a spiny spatula according to this form.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	They are of two sharp points, sharp extremities, thus with the spatula; but I will insert it slowly, little by little, so that during the operation nothing enters into the intestine, and that leads to that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydropic humor is from the intestines, because then it's necessary that you have sectioned to the navel for three fingers' breadth below, on the right side of the perineum.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydropic humor is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingers' breadth.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it's necessary that your section is above the rib on which you want to place the patient so that they don't accumulate excessive fluids at that loose location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate with the instrument the entire code, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the code and the siphaec, and you extract it; and if it's the quantity of a fingernail or around.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the siphaec until you reach the spot where you want to introduce the spatula, and that's the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it's made of silver or copper or gilt lion, at the lower part of which there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it's shaped like a feather's extremity according to the manner of plumage, thus as described.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper extremity of it there is a handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately draws over the instrument, and evacuates the water in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it's not suitable at that time, for it would kill the patient by resolution of their animal spirit, or it would hasten their death which is approaching.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that according to the quantity of its vertue and according to what the patient's disposition signifies to you, concerning the vertue of their pulse and their goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it's immediately retained by the code which retains the tube that is above the siphaec, of which I recommend to you that you perforate according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then iterate with the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for several days over fear, and beware of error so that you don't remain with too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear about the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure that one by burial in hot sand, and move to a bath, and await for a long time under the sun; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until they are healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and liver, regarding the extraction of water, according to what you have recounted in that which has preceded.
Capitol .lv.	The end.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with non-perforated urinary places.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some born children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a straight tube or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then it's necessary to perforate the instrument as soon as it's born with a very subtle spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the tube a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, it's retained and held back; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you don't pause the lead, it's possible that the urine which goes over the place, will not leave that clarity.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one whose tube is straight should be medicated with a lead key, thus as we have said, for many days until it's amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the tube is not in its place, are led astray, because of those, that one which is born and the tube deviates from the end of the virga, so that it cannot urinate at the designated places, until it elevates the virga with their hand at the designated places above; and it's not to their generation, for so that the sperm cannot penetrate to the mother according to rectitude, and it's a very lagging illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of operation is that the patient is placed on their back, and extend the head of the left arm towards your left hand with vigorous extraction, and insert the head of the arm at the site of the perforation with spatula-like agitation, as if it were a feather, or you do not cause any partition, so that the vein of the arm appears like the head of the arm and the trickle goes to the correct location according to need.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, four motives will accelerate it; and stop yourself at the moment when you are about to remove the blood, and cure the wound from within so that it heals itself.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the white deposit that accumulates in the perforation at the head of the arm and about the corrosion and blackening and adhesion of the perforation at the head of the arm.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Four moist humors accumulate this white deposit in the arm, and it is an emanation of decaying flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and another is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend them with a subtle unguent and remove it from within so that the entire mass is dissolved; and then pause over the subtle, miry spot with an Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the arm with a diaphanous ointment from within so that it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white deposit is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you apply cautery at the site of the lesion and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the white deposit is in the perforation of the head of the arm without circumcision, and one part of the white deposit is within the perforation and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the white deposit which is within from the beginning so that it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, for when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be troubled again.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also it is customary to accumulate in the genitals and in the perforation of black corruption, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that which has already been denigrated and which wants to corrupt or which has already corrupted; and then place liniments over that with good millet, which is contaminated with flour of scorched wheat and errors of trituration and crumbling.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure it with another cure so that it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for juvenile cautery is at two opportune moments, thus there is a flow of blood and to the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the arm is corroded and totally destroyed at that hour, then it is necessary that you introduce into the middle of the perforation a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the perforation at the head of the arm (and this adhesion does not occur except in that where the perforation is sound, and no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or apostema) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the arm is liberated from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to discern those exquisite things, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for some cause of the head of the arm and of the perforation, and thus it is because the perforation, when it is subtle, is strongly perforated by its subtlety, making it lighter.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the perforation and the head of the arm with a drizzle of subtle liquid, which has already been mulched in the cool water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it is cured with a stipetic wine so that it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	About the purification of children and the cure of what accumulates in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like the other wounds: but however with our operation and our will, and those of that should be properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle path to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their writings, and it is only because we have acquired it by experience, which causes us to have discovered the major part of the artificial and barbaric uses of circumcision and purification with a novacula and torches; and they used ligament with faith and incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all these manners and did not discover better purification with forceps, with ligament with faith that in purification with the nail, because four motifs flee from the codena downwards, because the codena of the perforation has two tunics, and one tunic is removed below, and strongly it is forbidden to another incision and sure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification which is done by alphabetic, and it is digital, of which the Sabatiers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not assured, because strongly it enters into the troupe of him.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	More in the operation use an ointment, strongly bind the fractured parts and correct your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the bowel movement of the infant is brief by nature, and many times they are evacuated in such a way that there is no need for modification, and you have seen it happen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is done with forceps and ligatures on the faithful, the goodness, experiment discovered to me, because the forceps are of proportional size, for which I acquire the acuteness that it is below as well as the acuteness that it was before; and thus when you take your hand so proportionally dosed, and dissect accordingly in a comparison at one time; and it makes compression of the faithful figure containing the bowel movement of the whole region, with which there can be no error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should hold the infant more firmly if it is one of those who understand a small one, do not hold except that you place the faithful in its bowel movement only so much, and let it go into the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then rejoice in all that manner which is possible for you to receive its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have it stay between your hands, prepared and arranged in order, and do not let it be seen; and hide the forceps in your hand or under your foot, so that the infant does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into its bowel movement and blow into the intestine, and pull it out so that the head of the bowel movement is visible, and then modify that which is added to it from filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then bind the marked place with double faith, and then ligate below that one small thing according to the ligature, and then you have said "pous" and indicated the place of the ligature under good retention, and dissect between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the intestine upwards and extract the head of the bowel movement; and then let the blood flow little by little, because it is better ; and pause powder on top and above the powder pause a drap in which there is spread a mixture of hot oil of cypress tree, mixed with oils recently extracted from roses; and let that be on top until the other day; and cure that one with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some of them are extramitated not-thwarting and the others are thwarting, so that the branch of the nail is not seen, and it is the length of the two acutenesses thus as the length of two manual handles together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More, the error in modification is because strongly you evacuate the entire internal bowel movement, or part of it that needs dissection.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then you should extend that from your hour to your ointment beforehand at the postulation of the place and dissect it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your ointment, then extract it in a hook and dissect it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More, if three days have passed, and you see that it is inflated below the bowel movement postulation, then let it be until the postulation is calm, and scrape off that which is softened, and dissect it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the bowel movement, because it will not hurt you at all.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure that one with the plague consolidated from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is dissected from the intestine according to measure, and you have obtained the parts above, that will not harm you.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And more, cure that one with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 48.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by oppression caused by stone or by congealed blood, or by rupture or by wound, and it resembles those things that we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the bladder retains it because of a stone which already is in the neck of the bladder, then you should know that the patient should be bent over the sieve-like seats.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then combine the feet of that one over the sieve-like seat and extend the sieve-like belly of the part above the sieve-like seat, and the patient should strain the sieve as much as is possible to him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted for expulsion of the stone to the back parts, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved in what we have said is vehemently done, the cause is above the patient, then you should know that you will administer extraction of it with an instrument called siringua, of which this is the shape: It is of silver and is subtle, conquering the lion's claw, thus like a canal of peacock's feather in subtlety of a ray long and similar to a palm and a half, at which there is a subtle cane in its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of examination of the urine is to take the warm and double-filtered fluid from the outer rim of the flank or near the good ligature; and insert the extremities of the tube into the partition below the circle, and write down the superfleas if any cause of the flank, rather introduce it into the canal with vehemence.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient sit on a chair, and encircle their waist with an olive oil bandage, and anoint them with oil of unguentum, and oil of olives and aguarridos.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the circle to facilitate its entry into the root of the vein; and double the vein above the partition of the navel; and then fill the circle with that; and then fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and this is how the patient will be relieved of the void cause, and it's not done in this order, but rather according to the method by which it goes to the tortuous vein.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extract the fluid from the small flank little by little, because the urine dries up the flank.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and make a cure for the urine, and use the circle, don't stop until the water and the circle are used to evacuate the bladder and the patient has relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of cleansing the vesicle with a clamp and similar instruments, which are suitable for that water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or it is congested with that, or it is constricted by poultice, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then do so with an instrument called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but since the extremity of it is dirty, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes also another way.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is a concave place, where the water that is impelled is, and it follows according to the quantity that oppiles that, its addition, until when some cause is attracted from the humidity, it is attracted, and when it is expelled, with water it is attracted, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does, which is phicated naphta in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of clampcedra into the humidity, and attract with that water which is impelled from the upper parts, because the humidity is attracted into the cavity of clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of clampcedra into the vein according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then fill the humidity with that water which fills, because that humidity will reach the bladder soon, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Form of the subtle crystal through which the bladder is crystallized, and that is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or gold, from which the head is poured out as if similar to a small feather, and below the canal is detained by a ligament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then bind it between two strong ligatures with a double-filtered vein, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the crystal into the vein.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you are not present at the bladder, then take a piece of parguames and make it into that circle; and pierce that with all its returnings; and then insert a strong vein into those channels, so that they are revolved; and then add the circle so that it is added also to the soothing, since you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and oils and aguas.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then bind that to the instrument and make it so that it is made like it was made in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 10.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone in which the operation is performed with a hand, and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now narrate it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	So I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects the infants; and of its signs is that the urine that is issued from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels their vein, and the veins are swollen, and then it is dressed; and in that water they make a hole in the cul-de-sac in place of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	It is the healing of children's health from that entry point where they have reached thirty-three years; and it is difficult to cure in old age.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Maybe in the young ones it is worse because it is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that one where the pain is greater and the cure is less likely; And if it is slight, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the commencement of that which modifies the patient in Christ's cross, which extracts all the filth from the sinful veins; because that filthy vein prohibits the entrance of the pain and the inquiry into it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient in Christ's feet and be consoled and comforted therein, so that the pain descends to the bottom of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another filthy veins.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and his hands are placed under the thighs of him, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then seek out that entire defect.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the pain in the void, then you will touch it at once with your dry finger over him.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't catch the entire touch at once, then it is necessary that you anoint with olive oil on the affected finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the ring finger if he is a young adult, and insert that into his hollow bottom.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And seek out the pain until it is below the affected finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press above that with your finger, and expel it to the lower parts before you see the place of the dryness.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand downwards to the lower parts, and let his other hand remain holding the codena which is below the genitals, in the place where the dryness is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatulum beneath the incident of which this is the form.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and divide in the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, beside the lace of the left thigh; and let the dryness be on that pain and the affected finger be in the anus, and let it be a transverse dryness, so that the dryness beforehand is wide and diminished according to the quantity that you feel of the pain being possible, and not greater, because you will compress the affected finger which is in the anus the pain from which the dryness is forgotten.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you will know that of the pain there are some which have an angle and margins, because the easing of it is made difficult for that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water it is like a lion resembling a gland, and it is round, and it is made of the easier easing.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that one which has an angle and margin, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus forgotten, then it is necessary that you operate on that, or that you stretch over that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on which you stretch over the pain, and do not evacuate from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	Maybe if you cannot operate on that, then you amplify the tract a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with a glass tube filled with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	Maybe if the pain is more than one, then at the beginning you insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over him; and then insert a little into that water; and similarly make as if you are moving more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a great pain, then ignorance is that you insert that into the great dryness, because it hastens to the patient one of two causes: either death or it leads him to continuous urination, for which the place is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Maybe administer expulsion of it from the inside until it is forgotten, or operate on the fracture of it with the forceps to extract that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and stretch that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And pause on that drape infused with oil and wine, or in rose oil and cold water, so that the postrema caution may be given.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then reset the patient on his haunches, and do not dislodge the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is dislodged, wash the place with water and much oil, and then cure it with a gentle diaphenic and diabolic remedy until it is healthy.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Maybe if in the wound apostema caution hastens, and it is adjusted and corroded, and of that it seems thus as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and for which the urine is prohibited (and that is known through the egress of the blood with urine), then insert the affected finger into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the poultice made with vinegar, water, and salt, and place it in opposition to the entire affected area, which is suitable for the healing process within, so that it may be healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	Take care in the hours of entire healing that you read both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and it is in the midst of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and urination is prohibited, then cure this one that you recommend beforehand so that you avoid section, because too many veins are involved in this healing and it is accused of section; and already you have experienced this, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron, the shape of which is like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extrication, pointed, fixed in a staff.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating it in such a way that the perforator comes to that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will perform the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is then absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then put your hand on what remains of the stone from the partition beforehand from the bladder, because it is crushed, and it is forced out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this healing is not adapted to you for some cause that prohibits it, then tie a thread beneath the stone, and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then squeeze over the stone in that bladder between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then dissolve the ligament and mollify the congealed blood, which is made into a poultice.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a ligature of thread beneath the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is dissolved, the calculus returns to its place and collects the poultice.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you to have the thread above, that you elevate the calculus to the upper parts, or that it returns to its own complement, and collects the poultice as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 16.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women's bladders.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	A stone in women's bladders is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone is in some of those, then the healing of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is because the woman's bladder is weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is because you do not find a woman who is skilled in describing her own measurements to the doctor when it is cast, or it is from women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with her own hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of section above the stone in women's bladders is far from the place of the stone, because it requires a deep section, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if it is necessary to provoke you to this, then take care that you take a wise woman who knows how to operate, and few are skilled in it.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of this, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the practice of women's bladder stones, or a matronal woman who is skilled in this art, or a woman who has taken part in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make that woman present, and command her to do all that you order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman's bladder is weak, then take care that you put your finger in her cleft and seek the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find it, cut beneath your finger, and then command her to insert above it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not weak, then command the matronal woman to insert her finger into the hollow of the patient's bladder and examine above the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and grasps it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find it, then take care that gradually you extract it from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts beneath with your finger's virtue until you bring it to the exit of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert above that apposition of the majesty of the hollow beneath the exit of the thigh, from which part it is to be stopped and sent the stone in that partition, and the finger of yours does not remain stuck to the stone beneath it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is small at the beginning; and then insert the radius above that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust in the section according to the quantity which you know that the stone will be extracted from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	I know that the species of rock salt are many: because among them there is little and great, lean and rough, long and round, and they have ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you know how many species of it are yours for what you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the vertebral location treated and keep it there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the rock salt is forgotten.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments which are used in the extraction of rock salt at home, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then you stop powder on the location and remove those powders and structure descends, and do not iterate that; and leave the rock salt and do not extract it, because for a strong wound the malady will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the blood is calmed down, then the location will settle, and you return to your operation until the rock salt is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia and its causes.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white cavity which is below the codena of the genitals containing the humor, and it is called a cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the proper panniculus which prepares nature in the partition of the humor, until it is seen that there is another humor; and it is the codena of the genitals between the white cavity which we have said, and it is not but bitter.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which affects the genitals, so that at those times it is founded on this matter, and some veins affect by percussion made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is white and aguish, and it is what is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs for which it is known on this aggregation of water are these: because if it is in the white cavity which we have said, then the apostema is red and declining a little in length, thus like the figure of humor, and it appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all that part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its proper panniculus, then the apostema is red and part of the humor, and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white cavity, then it falls below the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And as you want the cognition of the color of the humidity, then you will express the color of the humidity in the apostema in the midst of the cavity, and according to what is written in the vestige of the midst, judge that it is descending from it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	So when we come to the cure of the iron wound, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if it is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the wound.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then it is suspended above the two seats about some cause a little higher, and stop below the word drops.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then you sit on the left part of it, and command the minister to follow on the right of it, which extends its rod from two sides to the codena of the genitals and to the partition of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then you take a wide spatula and separate the codena of the genitals from my place for the length until you reach the pentangular.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And it is made the section according to a straight and equal distance from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white cavity, comprising.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And you remove that, and observe, and guard yourself for thus that you do not injure it; and your removal is the one which removes by partition so that it is suspended in the humor most subtly and scrutinized in the removal according to the quantity possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then you perforate the full cavity of water in a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then you separate between the two labia of the section with uncias, and extend the cavity to the upper parts; and do not touch the codena of the genitals comprising, and injure the cavity in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And you injure it in its totality or in pieces, and majorly the wide seat subtly, because if you do not precisely observe the injury of it, it is not made securely that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mostly the humor proceeds from that defect of its codena at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cavity, return to it, and then adjust the two labia of the codena of the genitals with a suture, and then heal it like the other wounds, until it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the corrupted blood through another bad humour, then it is necessary to remove the veins that are causing suspension, and extract the blood, and then take care of what has been said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	Perhaps the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that the two are kidneys; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equalization; and if you see that it is a workable operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you will purge the blood, and enter into the narrow passages that are submerged in oil or rose oil; and pause before pouring another oil which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over two genuflections and the miracle of the belly; and pause above double drapes and pulvis, and bind them above the limb which is according to this form.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two drapes and fill the warm oil according to this resemblance; and fill the extremities with what is taken from a warm cloth or humid oil, and fill the structure in the belt of the breeches, and one extremity takes hold of the backside within the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the thigh, and two extremities on two hips below and two other extremities on two angles, and the entire structure is adjusted in the belt of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in place of the narrow passage at the iron; and it is that you take a sharp cutting cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and ignite according to what has been recommended until the white ciphac containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce the ciphac, and ignite until all humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the ciphac into inches, and scrape in inches, and scrape with a sharp ignited cautery; and insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the blood that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more salvific and farther from blood flow, and better than an operation on the narrow passage.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Perhaps you have made a contrary apostema in the hour of narrow passage or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is known that you cure what contrariety you do for that, with a curative method that suits him according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer piercing according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which has been said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is known that you make the patient sit on some elevated seat, then pierce the apostema in the lowest part of the spine with a broad flat spatula, and pause the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it is the wide perception until all the water corrodes.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then pause on the warm place and bind it and leave it there, so that the remainder of the water corrodes.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Perhaps the contrariety is at the expense of the water in that hour you pierce it: and this is not done except for the quarrel of the white panniculus in the orrifice of the wound, which makes a contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water; then it is known that you put in the wound a painful instrument from which the water is extracted from the hydropits, in the preceding form; or adjust on the expense of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is augmented approximately six months or in those surroundings; and as it is added, then it is pierced according to that measured manner, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the narrow passage about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the narrow passage about this hernia, there is a lost fear of perniciousness in the major dispositions; because to me it has been seen, its dismissal and salvation by that better way.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you will remember the operation on that and the species of the apostemas.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the apostemas are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: either for acute sharpness or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the apostema according to the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a severe apostema.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often it is a lapified apostema, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel pain at all.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some hernias are made for swelling of the arteries, and for inflammation of those also because it has not been perceived, or for inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It's more likely that the disease is caused by inflammation of the arteries, which is confirmed by the dispersal of the abscess when it bursts in those same tendons.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	That which is caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause, but rather is compressed in the same tendons.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this specific occasion a section was made on the other muscles; and it is that you incised the code of the genitales, and then you stretched out the skin to the separated parts above, and extracted the white ciphac from it, and cleared the suspensoral ligaments of the vessels, and tied them, and incised the suspensoral ligaments so that you cleared all the separated parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the skin is already conjoined with those muscles, it's necessary that you extract the skin and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any cause of the ciphac, or between that which is between the vessels, then it's necessary that you clear all that adhesion and incise it for a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a native growth of flesh at the site of adhesion which is behind, then it's necessary that you incise all that is of it, and extract the skin also as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then take care that it is treated with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that occurs in the vitals.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A vit is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to a bruise with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult by exercise movements and walking on the affected thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is by tempering for that which is preceded by remembered remedies.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it's necessary to say that I opposed the operation according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it's necessary to make the affected thigh rest on an elevated pillow; and then you fasten the suspensoral ligaments of the testicles to the lower parts; and then you code the genitales in the same tendons in the vessels that are probable for the hernia; and hold those other ministrations that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then you incise in the spatium latus, going through a transverse section in the right of the vessels until they discover the hidden vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then you excavate the entire affected part, just as I have said in extracting the arterial roots which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then you leave it in that agulla in which there is a double thread, and tie it to the first of the places where the vit occurs, and tie another on the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then you incise those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added by the foul and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then you treat the wound with a treatment of other wounds in which you want to be healed so that the vessels may not become inflamed by one of the two genitales, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if vit occurs in all the vessels, then it's necessary that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are cleared of the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they are stabilized, or cleared for that so there is no growth in them.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by section that ends in the extended ciphac above the belly on the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by giving way the intestines of that rupture add to those intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of excess of it, and it occurs to these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by falls, or by shouting, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the ciphac, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess enclosed within the belly so that the ciphac compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is by section of the ciphac, because at the beginning it causes vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess appearing below the code of propdanis appearing, and that is by ulceration of the intestine, and the body of it is in the parts before the ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some vague matters are forgotten in the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some vague matters are made in the ventosity, and some vague matters run into the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is a great peril of the illness, and some vague matters cause bad pain and worsen when they are premature.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of the species of this disease, I fear it is iron, because I think that the medication should be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of operating on that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their own hands at the divided parts of their hernia if they obey, and then place yourself seated on a stool between their legs, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles at the divided parts below, and insert the cord of the testicles totally for the length; and then fix the two lips of the section with stitches according to how you need to close the section in those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly do from that, the hole may be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape that crust which is left on the cord of the testicles, until the white hard crust is discovered from any part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you have inserted the finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white crust, which is left on the cord of the hole, and between the crust, and absorb with that adhesion which is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then I place my hand on the cord of the testicles at the divided parts beforehand, and I also extend the white crust with my left hand, and lift the hole to the crust at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the hole downwards and you dissolve the adhesion which is behind in a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with your fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the hard white crust.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly afterwards.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which there are eleven threads, and insert it beneath the crust at the back of the cord, which is the section of the testicles, which is the hernia; and then insert the extremities which emerge from the thread until they are four threads, and then compose some stitches above some figure in the manner of a cross; and place them on that crust about which we have said that it is beneath the cord of the testicles with strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then you envelop the extremities of the threads and place them in strong binding until some of the vessels that do not irritate them cannot transmit any cause, so that from here on there will be no danger of abscess.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another strong binding according to the first binding, far from the mens three fingers; and then these two bindings release from the crust which is beneath the cord of the testicles the quantity of the greatness of the finger, and insert all the remaining roundedness, and remove from there the hole.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then insert into the part beneath the cord of the testicles for sectioning of which runs healthy and sane blood, thus as we have recommended in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and some crusts of white crust are cauterized, which we have said then to insert the theme of flow of blood, because many administrations accede to those) and release the binding until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the medication is delayed, then warm water should be poured, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the plague with another cure of plagues until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, I have not seen anything that has been hardened under the treatment of iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is in a vein; which is that you lift the vessels near the section over that which is facilitated by the environment of the abscess in that, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And heal the plague according to what we have said until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dispersion that occurs in the ankle joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some crusts of rupture occur in the ankle joints thus as we have said, and emerge from the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not show any cause of the intestines in the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to them in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged in that, an adjusted fissure is made in the crust until it descends into the intestine in the crust; and it accedes to that for the extension of the crust which is in the ankle joints thus as we have said, which causes it because the crust is extended, and then it is softened and the place becomes abscessed and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery thus as the narration of it has preceded.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some wounds are cured by iron in the following manner: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two arms, and then the area of the rupture of the apostemes is cauterized with a three-inch rod according to the quantity.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then tighten the white clyster that is inserted into the colon so that it may be discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the rod and place it above the prominent area of the clyster, and apply it to the region of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then kiss the two prominent areas on the extremity of the rod of the clyster, and adjust one of them to the suture with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then extract the extremity of the rod, and do not insert the entire clyster, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause, so that you may know how to cure an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Then cure that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the clyster is constricted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cod (testicles).
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Some wounds on the cod (testicles) in certain men are softened by this means because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire softened cod (testicle) onto the natural cod (testicle); and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, then at the beginning of the treatment, remove the excess of the softened cod (testicle) with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then insert between the sutures; and then cure by curing the other wounds until it is healed and the threads are cleared.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the science of the doctor who is expert in it knows how to cure what happens to him, and the other reason is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our own improvement, such as with horses, and goats, and pigs, and similar to those animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by making a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	Moreover, in that which is done by attrition, the way of operating is that we make the animal drink hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to be touching anymore.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Moreover, in castration done by making a section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and grasp the cod (testicles) of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspensors, and insert above each hole in one section until two holes proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then insert those parts so that you will have removed whatever is excessive.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the clyster, but rather the subtle clyster which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly loosens any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of Hermaphrodite disease.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodite disease in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which occupies the space in the cod (testicles), and in that which is between two testicles, figures like a woman's flesh in which they are hairless.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some wounds of that kind corrode the urine which is in the cod (testicles).
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Moreover, in women it is a species: and it is that the flesh of the woman on the perineum is like two testicles of a man, a little smaller and hidden in the partition before like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two from men and one species from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted flesh until it escapes the impression of that, and then cure those with the cure of other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine is emitted, which is in the cod (testicles), there is no cure or operation on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 71.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The thickness and prominence of flesh are caused by women's humors.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The thickness is adjusted according to natural causes, which are restrained and made into a rule; and some veins are enlarged in some women, so much that they swell also as in men, and are felt even in the joints.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then remove the excess of thickness from your hand or from a uncle's or other wise men's advice.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not delay in the incision, rather increase in the area of the root, so that no flux of blood is hindered.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then heal that wound with care of the ulcers until it is cured.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Bad flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that, and it is said to be evacuated from the divided parts before according to the appearance of a tail (and for this reason the first doctors called it "caudal malady"); therefore, remove it so that we evacuate also like evacuating thickness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	On the cure of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the bone of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small passage.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to bad matter that has preceded, and it is made or caused by unadjusted flesh or subtle and thin skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made or in the area of the mother, or in its ribs, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and prohibits from acquiring and from taking hold, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by observation of the uterus, if the oppression is apparent, it is propounded; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the signs and tokens or with the radiance.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the oppression is due to subtle skin, and it is pushed towards the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that which pauses over the two pubic labia, and then pauses with the signs and tokens indicating both the most affected areas.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia forward so that the subtle skin is broken and the oppression is lifted.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take a lancet and open the skin in oil and pause that over the area, and let it stay there for a day so that the area does not consolidate.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the skin is thick and dense, then remove it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the oppression is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with an uncle's help, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood, such as astringents, and dragon's blood, and onions, adjusted with the white of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide poultice of lead plaster so that the wound does not close too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for several days and administer lukewarm water of the ashes.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some veins are born in the native birth of other flesh, and then remove them according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is for cancerous apostemes, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the mother not to be made contrary with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 23.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occur in the bone of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins until they corrode blood continuously; and since they are ancient hemorrhoids, they are made into tails.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say also about those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the area of the mother and do not appear to the sensation, then in those no cure is made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the orifice of the mother above which one feels sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And then you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the tail to the forked parts, or with rough drag, and incise it at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those with the flow of blood from one of the powdered incisions, astringents, and likewise as cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soften the soles of the feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and of scorched millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ordinary quality and comfortable warmth, and I agree that you should apply a plaster to the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the bleeding has stopped, well and good; otherwise, apply two warm poultices, and scarify the breasts slightly.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in juice of colic weed or juice of arnagloss or juice of guarravier, and I think you should apply it to the area; and then carefully treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Perhaps this rough treatment is of harsh regard, because you should not include it in your apparatus according to what I have said in the previous engagement.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that area until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	About the accidental perforation of a hernia in the wall.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special types of abscesses that occur in the wall, such as cancerous and wandering apostema, and ulcerations and adherent and eroded and hemorrhaging fistulae and ragwort and thigh and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken about these evils and the species of those and their signs and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is fitting that I should speak about this treatise on apostema, which concerns the ones that gather in the wall when they are of the apostemas that collect together there, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of the iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, it is fitting that you consider if the pain of the apostema in its beginning is acute with percussion and inflammation and fever, and sometimes it enlarges and if you feel upon it, then do not puncture it, and treat it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is fitting that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline her back against a pillow and adjust her feet to the partition below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below the knees, and tie whatever is necessary with a convenient ligament.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow the straight path and administer the instrument with which the opening of the wall is opened, in the form of which you will find in those causes that you will do afterwards.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is fitting when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the radius of the wall of the woman's womb, and what of the instrument enters into the wall should not be more than the radius of the wall and the patient's evil.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	Perhaps if the instrument is larger than the radius of the wall, then it is fitting that you apply poultices on the texture of the radius of the wall so that the entrance of the entire instrument into the radius of the wall is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is fitting that you pause the vertebral column that runs in the instrument from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebral column until the opening of the wall is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then it is fitting that you separate it from the head of the instrument with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sania is evacuated, then it is fitting that you apply on the wound a medicated oil or green oil in which there is some stipidity; and place the calcium in the section of the radius of the wall.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And apply before the wall and on the tender wool, a clean cloth submerged in water in which there are softened mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it is treated for two days with an ointment that is convenient until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some vegetables are washed in the wall and the wound, thus they are crystallized in water and honey, and then in water in which there is dissolved root of iris or long aristology, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply rooted in the wall, then it is fitting that you are prohibited from curing it with iron, having cured it with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner they should help the unborn babies that are malformed, according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural birth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expel the parts below and desire to smell the air, and about this is judged by what is above her, and fixes the seat of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the seat of it on the womb's head, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is fitting that the belly of it should be compressed so that the embryo descends more lightly, as it seems to settle on the womb's head, and it is freed from those superfluous burdens with good moderation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Perhaps that which is another part is unnatural and unlaughable, because when the embryo sits on its feet and the body of it sits before its head and its feet, and the hand of it alone, or at its foot. It is situated at the head of the patient and their hand, or at their belly, and it is strongly converted on the dry column, and resembling the unchanging figures of theirs.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is not necessary to have a master who is wise and subtle in all those causes, and that they should guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you show the entire figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it is signified by that and stands over that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fever is situated on the dry head by natural increase, and it is vehement against the woman and is made in the difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of the patient is already debilitated, then make that seizure, or that the women hold the patient, and evaporate the congealed humor with fumigations and olive oil humectants.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the measuring rod between the small spaces of the spatulum, and find in it the second dimension, or dry that finger inside so that you can correct what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman inward so that she expels the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if she does not expel, then it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with a poultice of ptilli and a poultice of fumigating cynamon.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to her, then crystallize it, so that it is comprehended and makes that stormy condition with consent; and close the mouth of hers and her nose for one hour, because the fetus will be forced out soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are not yet fully expelled at the commencement, then it is necessary that you reduce them little by little with facilitation.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet above hers, and then settle the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus dies, then cut into those and extract the remainder of the fetus or take out the corpse with the hand of hers in a draught and extract that with equality, because it will be fully expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The placement of the embryo on the dry feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is situated on the dry feet, then it is necessary that you impel them in themselves, and then convert the small fetus, and then grasp that, and then take one of its feet and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But since they are situated between the thighs, then you command it to her that she presses, and make that external effort with consent, because it will be fully expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not fully expelled in that which we have recommended, then you return the small fetus little by little into its pause according to its natural figure, because it will soon be fully expelled in an easier situation.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited in all that which we have recommended, then take of a poultice of altea and dissolved gum, and strike everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then line it with the congealed humor of the woman, below the belly of hers.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that mixture into a warm bath, so that it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the divided parts of hers are thus lenified, then make for her a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause it to her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have done the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make that stormy condition and extract the mouth of hers, and lift it from that, and press the part below the belly of hers with gentle compression, because the fetus will soon be fully expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The placement of the fetus on the dry teeth and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus is situated according to this form, then you ingeniously insert between its small hands; and the woman should be seated on a dry column, and her feet are placed below, and those are situated on the mattress, and complete with her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the belly of hers little by little, and then extract what is below her feet from the aurelhas until it is prepared in the part below.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not yet expelled, then take her feet and make those movements vehemently, and then press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the fetus can reach the divided parts above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert her hands and grasp the small fetus little by little, and command the woman to press inward so that the fetus is fully expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The placement of the fetus laterally pending one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It is ingeniously reduced by the hand of hers, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if walking is not possible, then make her lie on the mattress, and strike her thighs with vehement concussion, and then administer gentle treatments which you have recommended for poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the swelling has come, then make a poultice above the affected area, and apply a study on the reduction of the evil, and bend the foot according to its natural shape, and apply a bandage to the woman and command her to take it in so that it is not forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Rest the foot on expanded cushions and its surface is at the back of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Because the midwife held the hand of the foot and slowly turned that small part little by little, and thus that movement was facilitated.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is so engaged, and then stop on the joint of that water which we have recommended to be used for oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command it to be massaged little by little, and when you have made a poultice, then make that poultice above an affected area and command it to be inclined towards the right side, and then command it to be compressed; and make that bandage in condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus lies on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the horrific pain of the mother is according to this manner, consider, and then you insert your finger into her vagina so that it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended above the face and neck of it, then you insert that of the embryo, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then you apply the foot to the divided parts within so that it pauses according to what is necessary, and command the woman to take it in some gentle movements, and the sir will be forgotten, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that many twins are born not naturally, and some times three or four, but this is strange and harsh to understand; but I know that these are causes against nature, and it is not life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each of those umbilical cords; some gentle movements are forgotten, thus it is a fetus for natural birth, and thus some gentle movements are non-lausable thus as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult cases of their births and they arrive at what we have said about the non-natural figures, then you cure them thus as we have reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and delays, and it is ingenious according to the whole figure as it is prepared by the ingenious birth for health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some wounds are formed on the mother one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman who aborts gets seven, and another X is totally formed, which causes a point to be made for measuring the glorious savors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And thus it is certain that it is in the science of the midwife that she strongly holds onto that small similarity to that, and therefore stops at that which she knows.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not before existed, and you are forced to use opposing operation on the mother, then it is certain that you consider if the woman is of sane virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is certain that the woman should be placed on a soft bed with two pillows, and her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs should be elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister held that of two parts or is tied to the bed so that the body of it does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you humidify the mouth of its mother with olive oil and mucilage of marshmallow and of fenugreek and of sesame.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then inserts her hand into the mother, and then seeks the place where the nails are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient places in that: then you consider if the fetus is prepared to be born above the soft head, and then you find the nails in its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or below the beard, or in the armpit, or in the convenient places of the ribs, or below the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	More so if the delivery is above its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is certain that you hold the nail with your right hand, and stop the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand into the facilitated place and find the nail in some of those places which we have mentioned, until you come to the boyish cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then stop and fix in the application of another uncle, or the third if it is necessary, so that it may be attracted equally, and not be extended according to its own rectitude as much as possible.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And you will heal the entire affected part, so that the swelling of it may be alleviated thus, as it is done in teeth devolving into eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And collect in it the water that is between them so that the extension may be mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then collect that the nurse united some six threads and inserted them expertly and revolved around those retained waters.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the affected part of the foot is forgotten, then the uncles are permitted to enter the place where it may be pushed out; and do so inside that the entire foot may be forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is swollen in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of it, then collect that a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it inside so that everything may be forgotten, and place it either at the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus collect that you should make a similar application on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is large, or it tends towards contraction in the swelling, or it is at the head of the adjusted water, then collect that you should insert between the fingers spatula-like spines and divide the head and extract the water, or that you will discover with an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the foot is of large head by nature: and then collect that you should insert that with alum solution, or that you take it with the alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and contracted towards the ankle, then be opened inside so that the humidity which is in the foot may be expelled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor does it tend towards swelling, then you will insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the evacuation of the belly is apostemated or it is in the hydropic, then collect that you should perforate it inside so that the humidity which is in it may flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the foot is above the six feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is contracted towards the belly and foot, then collect that you should extract it with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the belly and foot inside so that the water which is in them may flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are stagnant and turned towards the head, then the measure inserts the left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert the hand in the opening of the instrument, and seek with that the head, and direct it with the fingers inside the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it an uncle, or two uncles, and direct it to those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is contracted due to apostemic caution lest it tends towards the humor, then collect that you should not trouble it; instead collect that you should administer effusion of humid and greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humectate.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the foot is above the sixth rib, then if it is possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the living foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be inserted in pessaries, and let it be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And collect that you should not leave any cause of dentition from the secondary.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostems caused by the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it tends towards flux of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was born dead, and then above that focus another conceived embryo, and then the fetus died again.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him a long time ago an apostem in the sixth embryo; and it swelled inside so that it became pregnant, and began to grasp with a broken arm.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his cure, and I medicated him for a long time, and the plague is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I paused about him for some causes of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed some journeys, and extracted another bone; and I was very marvelled, as if in the belly there were no bones.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead foot.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in the six thousand disposed positions, and I had seen it in such a manner for a long time, corrected by a small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you do not need to forcefully restrain it, but rather that it is science and aid that the doctor's artificial hand is placed on the hand for curative administration.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the effusion.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertebrate in which the matrix is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of stretcher on which the books are placed, to which two virtues are added in both extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	The emperor ordered this virtue to be covered, which is more subtle than a stretcher, and made of ebony or of wood from boys.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each wood is two fingers and a margin of about two fingers, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle place of two woods there are two adjustments of that metered wood which are already fixed, whose length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is about two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it is opened in those places where you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that one, more subtle and more lightweight:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of woods of ebony or of boys according to the similarity of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	The emperor has them on the extremity of it with two additions like that, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the matrix, then you make the woman sit on a chair with her feet suspended, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then you open your hand on the instrument like that, making a grip according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the matrix, until the meter makes it so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertebrate that the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of impeller on which the effusion is propelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of amputation on which the great head is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like a forceps on which the teeth are placed at the extremity, like that, and some veins are made long like that, according to this form, like that, on which the teeth are placed like the teeth of resection in which it is incised and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of small amputation:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps on which the teeth are placed to close in which the head of the effusion is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities on which the head is separated:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are excavated, and when they are multiplied, the species of that one are prepared by the artisans, as it is lighter in its operation and more suitable for the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you do not operate with those instruments if it is not necessary, because the need for those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is retained by the enfantement, then you command the malady to retain its sieve there, and then make that stirring in condition, and stretch your hand over the mouth of it and over its nostrils, and if for that reason it is deformed, well it is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And then, you take a cup and pierce the cover with a tube and pause in that herb opening the mouth of the matrix, like calm and rough and anet and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and santal.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and then pause that over the flame.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then you pause a cane of canaviera in the mouth of the matrix, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the matrix.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that stirring as I have said, and the second one will be forgotten at velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If it remains Roman, then you command the matrona to submerge her left hand in oil of sizami or in mixture of altea, and then you introduce that into the conch and quest for it, and when you find the aura, then take it and extract it little by little according to rectitude so that the matrix does not fall from the vehement attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Beforehand, you make sure that it is permuted to the right and left costs, facilitating.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it is adjusted in the quantity of attraction, because it will obey and evade from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, we have not recommended the cure in sternutation and medicine of the cup with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	Mostly if you have not forgotten all the causes that we have recounted, then beware that you do not fatigue yourself over that iteration of abstraction, mostly I empower that which is issued from the mouth of the mother, and then crystallize it in an engagement and tetraformation; because that far-off will purify it for several days and it will dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you purge, it is of the elevated bad air at the head, and in the stomach, and that leads to the malady; and then it is known that they are administered under fumigations and conveniently adapted to that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Mostly the ancients used to treat it with fumigation of nitrite and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method of instrument by which the woman is fumigated below, retaining menses and secondina.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of glass or of clay.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the subtle extremity should be placed in the cone and the broad extremity over the focus, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the focus.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in until it is consumed by that fumigation and then another will follow.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	About the treatment of the unperforated navel of the infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some infants are born with navels that are not perforated, which have a subtle and obstructed passage.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is known that the midwife should perforate with her finger in that passage; and if not, she should perforate with a sharp spatula, and beware that she does not touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that woolen cloth in wine and oil; and then cure with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	Mostly if you fear that it is obstructed, then pause in the treatment for a few days, and wait until the infant wants to expel.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And then there is obstruction of the navel due to consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is known that this consolidation should be incised, and then it should be cured with what we have said about the treatment and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	About the treatment of the fistulas that come from below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that come from below in the lower part are swollen and gross, those which come forth near the anus or in the space of one region.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and corroded by the putrid white humidity or subtle pyroura, and some veins are derived from these fistulas, some penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known by what is issued from them for the exit and for ventilation; and some times use the badness of exit, and often it is issued from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas, some veins are derived in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which the penetrating fistula is known, entering into the anus and not-penetrating, it is that you should put your finger inside the anus, and then you should apply a subtle thread of iron or of metal in the fistula when it is not twisted.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Mostly if it is twisted, then insert into that subtle thread of lead or of horsehair until you feel the thread or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progress in the treatment of any cause of evacuation or worm or ventilation, thus as we have said, then you should know that it is not penetrating, and then you should proceed to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the signification of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such an extent that the place where medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Mostly if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the thread should be inserted here if it is not twisted into the bone, and there is pain in the circuit of the region; and that sometimes it becomes putrid; and that it does not work in this medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of them is troublesome and vain effort of the foolish doctors about which they boast.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Mostly in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, health is iron-bound, separated according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been and proceeded.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the badness goes among your hands over the two fingers and elevates the legs of it into them, the thighs are inclined towards its belly, and then insert a thread of lead, or of iron if it is in the twisted fistula, until you know the place where the thread passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if it feels the badness around the neck, then it is known that you should insert your finger inside the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the tendon a thin, penetrating pain, another that you feel between the tendon and the skin, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and do not touch there, because it is not a healthy place, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Perhaps emperor's doctors have said that some remedies are healthy in some people with tender skin.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medication through which you expect to achieve youthfulness in it is that you ignite subtle cauteries according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously described, and introduce that ignition into the fistula until it reaches around the ankle; and then proceed for two or three weeks until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated skin areas are similar to the downy plumage of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal those wrapped-up ulcers in a bandage until all those adjusted skin areas are visible, and then heal with medicines that engender and consolidate the skin, and if it is healthy, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tendon is inside, and does not penetrate into the tendon that is in the hernia, and between that and the tendon that is only a thin layer of skin or of membrane, and sometimes the fistula is in what is the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the drying of the tendon, and it will be in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the tendon is seen, and for the tendon it is freed and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated skin areas which are similar to the downy plumage of a bird and do not disturb them with any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Perhaps it is twenty times that you come between you and your operation when you are healing those skin areas, then the thousandth time it will be and of the less sharp instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts well two good habits: so it is the adjustment of those adjusted skin areas, and the removal of the blood's excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal those wrapped-up ulcers in a bandage or with three sittings until the place gets strong, and then heal the wound with a hard skin that engenders and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines are those which are most effective and remove excess; when then it is restored, it is already healthy and does not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	Perhaps the fistula has already penetrated into the groin of the hernia and is elongated from the surface of the body, then you will find the tendon in the hernia and inquire about that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And then you will feel the tendon and between you and it is only a thin layer of membrane or skin, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation in that case according to the way of confidence and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you acquire the conquest of the intestine so that it is possible for you to enter into the fistula and the cure is propounded; and do not process too much with the drying so that you do not incite the contained liquid, and that you act upon the patient's sentiment of will; and then heal that which we have said because it is strong in its health; or to elongate that thin layer and remove that pus which dries until near the hernia, as we have said, either with a tendon or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated skin areas which are in the drying until one can make a crust; and then strive to make the restoration of all the wound in the drying, and if the excessive pus is not consolidated, and the hernia remains open in the part of the hernia, and it will be less sharp for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And the fistulated skin areas are finished according to this method: it is when you introduce the tendon into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the hernia around the surface of the body with the codena and on the margin of the hernia, then take the tendon of perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the courses according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and introduce it into that wrapped-up ulcer of five ulcers or around those; and then introduce the tendon into the ulcer in the fistula until you acquire the conquest of the intestine.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Perhaps it is penetrating into the margin of the hernia properly inside, then you extract the ulcer from that tract as if you were introducing the tendon into the hernia; and extract the extremity of the ulcer and adjust the two extremities together, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when you have inserted the ulcer into the skin, strengthen well until those skin areas are inserted which are between the two extremities of the ulcer and which fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healthy.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	Perhaps the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you are prepared, but not too much in the groin, because it is not for you to do that so that you do not incite the contained liquid; and then make it until it is healthy.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula-like instrument is the one that is used to make a fistula: its curved part is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that it does not insert unnecessarily, just as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The stitching of hemorrhoids in which a healthy blood flow occurs at the insertion of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are classified into two manners, because they are either between the buttocks seeming like this that is of carbon, or those which have a fat resemblance.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those which are small and large, and the blood flow of those is sometimes one, and it's many, and it's outside the buttocks, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	It is often seen that those which are outside the buttocks are according to the measure of little humidity, from which blood flows with citrus water or a small amount of blood as continuous discharge, and it's according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is next to the anus is that one commands the patient to sit down and to exert himself inward so that the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take them in your hands and suspend them in a mixture or hold them with your fingernail, and then cut them with their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the nails are not held in them due to their humidity and softening of them, then take them with a rough cloth or a knife or a lanolin-covered thread, and extract them from their roots, and then cut them and powder over their ulcers with powdered caustic substances according to the insertion for cauterization; or cauterize them as it is previously described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal them with another cure until they are completely healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the evacuation, then crystallize the patient in crystal form in which it is slightly bitter, and wash with that water that is in the anus and it will obey the evacuation more easily when the patient evacuates.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is easier, and it is that you take them with your fingernail, or that you take them with a nail, and insert them, and then heal them with water that we have said until they are completely healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he who administers the insertion, should administer the stitching of them according to this manner: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make that penetrate into the needle at the root of the other part, and wrap the two extremities of the thread around the part beneath the needle, and so latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in strong structure, and then loosen the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And make that into a totality, and let it be one of those and not be disturbed, so that the superfluity of blood flow occurs from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then stop on the anus wrapped in oil rose or in wax; and stop that on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be until it falls out; and when it is cast off, heal them with an ointment or another cure until they are completely healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many ways are hurriedly added for the excision of wounds or for constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are antiquated and not valid in that medicine, then it is necessary that you root them out with the point of the spatula or with your fingernail until they are humid wounds and are held back by the scar tissue above, which prevents their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you dig them out with a vehement root until the first way so that much blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are completely healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the cure of piles, this is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that piles, this is clear, and it is not so if you do not notice the redness according to the color of the body similar to a head of garlic, and it is made in the whole body and mainly in the parts beneath the feet and toes, and it ends for those who have pain from them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that it be inserted into what is in the circuit of the piles, and it be held with forceps or a nail, and it be eradicated from its root; and then heal it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the second way that is previously described in the seventh chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But of true warts, it is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many ways come to the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure of them is that you extend and insert them, or that you strengthen them with a thread or a hair until they fall out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, according to what we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now they are eradicated inversely and non-inversely by the instrument which you will direct.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Most often it is a small, festering or ulcerated wound on the surface of the body that annoys much in the groin, and when it bothers there, it seems to be a sign of festering decay, and it is caused around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a small tube of oak or hazelnut, and make it strong, and place it over the wound until it contains the circle of the tube with the edges of the body; and then return your hand around the tube so that you insert what is in the circuit of the wound, and hold it in the groove of the flesh, and eradicate the decay from its roots.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make one with a tube of iron or copper according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The lower part of the tube should be subtle, closed (not perforated), enveloped so that above the finger the grasp of it is relaxed and the rotation of it.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the decay according to what is previously said in the chapter on cauterization of atheyl.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give crusts.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some crusts are made of silver or gold or copper, melted or hammered; and some crusts are made from those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered for the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose veins are fragile or delicate, the crusts of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small crusts:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube at the bottom where the purse is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance from where the purse is tied, thus sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it afterwards, which is inserted into the vein, should be closed (not open) much like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of the joint there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the size of the roots and the vein, even if it is a small one.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch should be where the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin are placed, and the root of it should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated for many channels, thus as it is turned around; and if the space which is between the channels is large enough for the thickness of the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude fiber which is of twelve fibers, or around them; and adjust the pouch to it; and when it is placed in the body, it should be tightly fastened at the head of the crust between two distinct points with strong constriction, and then crust-ize each channel: The quality of crust-izing in this way is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be seated on his back, and lift his legs up to him and place one cord above it where he has homes or a lantern; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the vein to facilitate, and then the minister takes the pouch and squeezes out two more essences in vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crust; and then remove the crust and the patient lifts his legs up to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces out that pus, it will hold as much as it can; and if he sleeps in that way for a whole night, it is more desirable in judgement.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	Most often if you crust-ize it in the illnesses of dissolution of stomach and evacuation of it from the gut, then you iterate the cautery until it is healthy.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the vein there are morbid or apostemated abscesses, then the crust should be subtle and lion-like, among the crusts which children are often crust-ized with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is convenient to the book, and you have spoken thus about the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what and where they are made, and according to the place on which they happen.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why many wounds are made thus, such as the striking of a stone, or incision of space, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a dart, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Most often the wounds that are in the places of the body are thus, such as a wound on the head, or neck, or foot, or stomach, or finger, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And you have recommended the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you should begin to treat the simple headaches of the head, because the memory of the composed remedies will come to the treatment of the third head capital.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache of the head occurs and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to a settlement of peyra or similar, and you have already trampled the codeina as much as possible, and it's a great pain and themes about that patient having a hint of apostema caution, then you should quickly cure the cephalic region; and don't delay, for extracting from the healthy part according to the quantity of its virtue, unless there's no prohibiting cause for curing, especially if the healthy part is free from the pain.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it's the opposite of curing the affected painful part; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and coarse vices.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is no prohibition from the minor affliction, then reduce the vices and do not approach flesh nor vice.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And stop on the pain, if you find an apostema caution, which is infused in oily rose oil or in wine in which it is stipulated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are certain of the apostema caution, then stop on the pain, if it is recently with holy water and the air has not moved that powder which you recommend to apply little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already moved that, then stop on the healing ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the pain is great or is due to inflammation of the space and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for poultices, then adjust them with a suture according to what you recommend for the suture of theirs.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the pain has already been discovered in the bones and flesh, and it's not retained by it except for a small suspensor, then you should insert that and apply curative medicine to the pain with remedies and restore the flesh in place of codena, and command the patient to be free from vices in which there is grossness: capsules and forms of coyting and similar to theirs, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrid matter in the codena and it doesn't adhere to the bone, then you should insert all that purifying material and gather it, and apply curative treatment to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these pains there is an artery or vein from which holy fluid may flow, and it's not absorbed by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find that non-absorbed, then you should insert that with a spatula, or ligate that; and if necessary to provoke what we have said does not concur, then you should cauterize until the holy fluid is absorbed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these pains are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; therefore you should powder over those with this powder, because consolidated that which the air has not moved.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take oil of sesame seed one part, holy dragon's blood two parts, and unextinguished cause three parts; let all be well-triturated and crumbled, and from it the pain should be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be over that adhesive, and let it be coagulated with holy water.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen that beneath with poultices and lift it, and do not dislodge it while it is thus, because it is not apostematized, for it is not eradicated by the medicine until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some old woman makes that solo concoction, when it's not to your presence with holy dragon's blood and sesame seed.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And thus this medical operation is done on the great pains when it's convenient to stop on those and they are strengthened, and the recent pains with their holy water, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it's summer time, then it's not intention to apply this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, therefore you should pause on those healing ointments digested, or pause on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purification; and then cure them with the other curative treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if you find a pain fracture in the bone, and it's small, then you extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And you will direct the cure of the fractures of the head in what is coming.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the pains of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the pain occurs in the neck, then it's not different in medication, and between the pain of the head when it's simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or torn, then if it's a nerve, it's not in the ingenious remedy but rather evaded curative treatment with what makes vehement stipulation, thus like zinc and zeal that it's veteran and similar to theirs because no one has seen nerves and contradicts that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And you should not pause on the pain for any total cause of all coldness, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is in the brain, which is the worst part of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if you are treating with medicinal waters, thus as the cause is washed away by double water, some infused oil in rose or non-rose, and it is washed away by double water and other minor pains are alleviated according to this manner, and they find human relief.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the plague is great, then administer a suture, or bind the lips together, and take care to heal that wound with poultices so that it may be healthy.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the plague is deep or has reached the lowest part of the purification, then pierce that in the place most prone to it.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if the plague has cut an artery and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or ligate that, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke it to stop.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have cut the tendons of the gullet or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the codena with a suture over the cane of the gullet and do not touch it; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and take care to strengthen it with a decent structure, and leave it for several days; and take care to heal it with human relief in which is stipulated and excited until it may be sanctified.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the plague has made a wound in the bone, then pierce that, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from it; and what you do not appreciate, leave it until the plague is purified, and it may be separated and the edge of its bone is alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder over it with the powder that you have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has made a fistula, then take care of it with water from which the reminiscence will come to you properly in the seventh chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or of similar things that are made between the blades and are made with a spatula or a knife or a lance or similar things.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of its depth, then consider more if the wound has been ventilated when the patient was in a bad state; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with seven bloods, then you pause in it from the first hour to powder, and do not strengthen it because the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and kills the patient; rather pause in it with human attraction, and remove those two veins on the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the human relief is not present to you, then pause at the orifice of the wound as much as possible so that it sucks out what is of the humidity; and make that the patient sleeps over the wound so that it runs out what is in it, adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound has passed three days or more and does not reach the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart or constriction of wing, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the wound is saved; and afterwards take care of it with warm compresses and other curative treatments until it may be healthy.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is exhausted, and already all time has been spent, then you will know that a fistula has been made; take care of it therefore according to the seventh chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is by incision of a spatula or of a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then take care of it with water that precedes suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has made a price in the bone, and then you have cut through the bone's fragments, then twist the wound and gather to extract those fragments, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them until the wound is purified, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of other accidental wounds in the other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that reaches the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great many veins that come from the intestine or nerves of the intestine, because it is made an introspection of them and their suture has been violently and subtly purified.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the introspection of them in the seventh place at once, because it swells and becomes grossly inflamed, since the instrument of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, thus as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you will know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient in sutures of other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper stitches communicate with the other wounds, more Empire than those proper in the stitch of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you every explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Then it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine has been found for that, and it is very difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either by shrinkage of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when it is so, then you should scald that in this way, that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid with warm water alone, or that you cook in boiling water, and cyperum, and spic, and embrocations, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some vegetables make it visible in which there has been stipulation, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And then when the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which there are cooked altaea and malvas, because for that it is alleviated the internal instrument of the patient with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	More if it is excused the internal instrument of the patient near this cure, then you should separate the disruption a little with an instrument in which you have inserted emollients.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and there is no occupation to occupy with necessary defeat.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, thus you see the shape of it:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp point, and the other part not acute, and the subtle extremity, and it is not in the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is obtuse by a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then when the wound is enlarged and is outside the intestine, then you should ensure that its reduction is according to the form of its natural location, in its own proper place, if it is possible about that, because better it is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	More when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs thus that their head may be higher; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise the head of the patient and the feet thus that the parts below may be free.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should put your attention and consideration always thus that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer it in large wounds and in smaller wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, put that which is at your preparation, and make it so that the minister is between your fingers, which holds the disruption whole with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and thus uncover from that to whom the stitch has been made for another cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and thus you should lay the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the codena, with the two extremities of the ciphac which is below the codena of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have added the two extremities of the codena and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so they form four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And thus you strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some vegetables from two parts together, and thus add the two lips to the wound for decent addition; and thus you lay the thickness of the finger and fix another needle there, and thus you tie it with faith as if it were the first needle; and do not cease to do so if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And thus the smaller needles are between roughness and subtlety, because the subtle needles hardly pierce the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult entrance into the codena, and therefore it is necessary that they be smaller in subtlety and size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in two extremities of the codena too close, so that the flesh is not pierced heavily and that the wound may heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they are not prolonged with a suture so that the wound is not prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And thus you insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not let the patient turn over onto their sleeping side; and you will place upon the suture powders expanded from all parts, which hold the extremities of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suture with needles are thus more convenient in small wounds, because they have need of a suture of one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is common: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, from the codena and two extremities of the ciphal, at one time, with a needle in which there is subtle and gross envelopment.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to that same place from which it started, so that the thread can be pulled back with a subtle underhand movement to the wound, so that the suture is a second suture of drawn threads.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the small finger's mallet.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And in this suture, wise men are familiar with it.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in this suture, I have seen a wound that was inflicted on a man in his left belly, which had been wounded by a knife, and it was the disruption of a major wound of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine of my middle location, and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have returned that deposit that the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and I have cured it and it is healed; and then I have visited it for many years, and it has been converted into its proper functions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by a miracle, it was done, because I did not cure it with an ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment or medicine was of use, but rather I put many times two visits a day and assiduous ablutions with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	There are two special types of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the codena, and meanwhile you insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the codena and in that same moment it straightens according to the rectitude and length of the whole body, and it releases the extremity of the ciphal where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thigh.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another time in the same extremity of the thigh from the front part to the back part; and release the extremity of the ciphal that is in this layer, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate in that your penetration, which you make penetrate into the ciphal in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of the inner thigh until all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from that moment and sew up the extremity that is of the ciphal on the other side, and extract the needle from the codena which penetrated, and then return it to the codena and sew up the extremity of the ciphal that is on the other side in this same extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the codena which is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do it once and again, and do it once and then another time until you sew up all that is in front according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew up the suture of pellicies in which you sew up the skin, also that you sew up the ciphal one time from the part of the extremity of the codena, and that you release another time until it is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	There is the second special type of proper suture that Gualia recommends, and this is to be done with serum of it and for its recommendation, it is that you sew up according to similarity in which you collect medicinal forces that sew up, also that they add all part to its comparable part convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what you have recommended.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	That you leave the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own part from the front, and make it penetrate to the back part in that sole, and release two extremities of the ciphal; and then return the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the ciphal.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then return those casings, and make them penetrate certain back parts until they reach the front part in two extremities of the mirror on the opposite side that is in the contrary layer.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common suture, and it is a suture of which I previously mentioned remembering.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the serum of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And the doctors said that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the introduction of the needle from what is due to you, and make it penetrate until the other layer according to the suture of those who sew up the curves inwards.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	We know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	Maybe the judgment of medicine for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is because when you recently contracted the plague in the holy blood then, the air alters that and reduces the intestine and cooks it decently, then pauses over that incarnative powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that alkaline ointment which you have present there to make a hard and durable paste, and thus consolidate ciphers and mirrors; and then cure it in this way as is the cure of other plagues until it is sanctified.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	Maybe if you do not have the medicines, then pause over that just now, because it begins to get worse quickly, and changes those two veins of the day, thus as you and teach, until it is sanctified, because you do not need another medicine in many disposed motives when the plagues are so simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Maybe if you fear that the plague will spread to the principal members, then cover yourself with a warm cloth of tempered quality, or with a warm ointment, and pause it in the circle of places that are between the joints and fingers.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the holy intestines, because many veins are ending there, then crystallize that bitter black powder, and majorly if the pus is generated in the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	We know that what comes from the large intestine is of lighter pus, more easily cured than what is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult cure because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive a cure of plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and due to its magnitude that is in those, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Maybe if what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your direct method with which you reduce the entangled intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Maybe if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then you stretch it out over the place that is denied of it, so that veins and arteries come to flourish with healthy fluxes, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert what is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the vein pending on the part below the plague far from it, so that above you is alleviated the attraction of it deviating from the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the holy abdomen with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gesture and ventosity.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore you should continue the cure of it since it was not confused in its sanitation, maybe you will continue to make it more subtle until it is sanctified and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And you then saw that the place was consolidated, you should take care of the patient who falls over him because of the bad accident in the holy abdomen; and do not fall for that bad accident and roam in their many disposed and mangy miles, and then enter in a bath and is exercised in his own words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already I described some experimented methods that when an intestine plague occurs, and it is small, then cover it according to this manner: take fragments of large caps; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a fragment of those that have the open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of those and stretch its mouth, separate the cap of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another fragment for the first method, and do not cease from doing fragments until you have made one according to the quantity of the entire plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it and thus the plague; and reunite those attached caps in the intestine until the intestine is sanctified; and do not harm the patient with any nuisance.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And already it is possible that the intestine is tied with subtle thread which is made from the intestine of annexed beasts, because it is mixed in a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it is not descarnated, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of glue, enveloping, and then insert that thread into needles and thus in that intestine, and reduce it in the rupture.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suture with fragments is not but according to the way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is great and extensive, it worsens especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not just a subtle affection, but rather a total illness.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	About the treatment of ulcer and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every plague and abscess, when they become inveterate and old, is an ulcer, and it's not consolidated and healed for a long time, and it's not separated, then, wherever it may be, it's universally called fistula and we call it that abyss.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, according to truth, is a hardened, tough, white node on which there is no pain and which is surrounded as if it were surrounded by a ring of pain; and for this reason, that ulcer is called "ring of pain", that is to say, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in a humid ulcer that gets worse; and for this reason, the humidity is separated from the ulcer in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some of these humors that have this humidity are soft, and they are few, and they are thick, and they are subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already said in the division, then, when you discussed the wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed nor is it on naked flesh, is not just for one of these nine causes: either because of little blood in the body; or because of bad humors; or because between the flesh and the lips there is hard, prohibiting the birth of flesh; or because of soft legation; or because that ulcer in itself is putrid and the matter that it sends to the bowels is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient for its cure; or when corruption settles in the region, and it is pestilential; or because of the properties of the region, just as in Saragossa, where it is difficult to digest the maladies, and healing from abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is one bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Yes, and I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their cures with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is fitting that you know how to cure a fistula, which is done by way of surgical operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that affect the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give to the proximity of the main member and similarity.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus among those fistulas that occur in this manner are those of difficult healing maladies, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas at a depth where you do not perceive to those places that I said, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you acquire that hand.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that hand with a subtle point of lead, because lead in the levity of the dry body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has very horrible matter, it is not possible for you to signify on it with your hand.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then crystallize the horrific matter through its own horrific aspects, because the humidity by which you crystallize it goes away from the other horrific aspects and corrects them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula in which there are many horrific aspects and this is on top of all your strength, with your interior fortification, in which you fortify the malady, and the invention of the pain goes away from your compression on the hand over the place, and similarly to the significations and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And since you have stood upon all those causes in a steady state of truth, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long-standing from joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have and said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dissect the fistula according to what has been said about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the horrific aspect of the flesh, or of the pus and similarly, and cure it within so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then it is fitting that you incise it in the preceding area as much as possible, and then mundify it from all its corrupted flesh; and then administer some enveloped medications acutely, and introduce them into the conquest of the fistula, which has comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if there are some evacuated matters within that acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then return it to its place, and restore it with those that generate healthy flesh within, so that it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify that, then you should inquire into that and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is discovered by you and there is some corruption or decay in it, then you should scrape that within so that the corruption may be removed entirely; and then take care to encarnate it with what will heal it.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and you see that it is thus, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover with second thoughts and exquisitely make the reason for it and the purification of it in the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And then if it is healed, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the profound depths of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore in that case it is not generated but rather left alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to extract it, then you extract it with subtle forceps that are convenient for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then you exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and from those do not leave any cause in your fortitude.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have made opposition to any cause of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then you incise those ligaments or flesh thus here, and extract the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause over the plague that which will worsen the plague, and leave it until it is in the vicinity of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the plague so that it is not consolidated, and the section which you have incised in your operation is constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone above the three-hundred-year-old oil, or the submerged bone in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green vertebrae, because when they will pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and their attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone thus like the bone of the chamber or thigh or similar to those, and what of it is corrupted is the face of it so solitary, then scrape that with resolution so solitary derrier until the darkness and corruption are removed, and then restore the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and totally incise into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you endeavour to bring it to a man in his thigh for he pauses and exemplifies and assists over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There is a young man of around thirty years, to whom there occurs pain in his thigh, and from the divided parts the worse is on the matter that divides the body until the matter pervades the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess in a great abscess, and I do not find the extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extend the time to that error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and I correct the matter of the putrid matters, and its cure is then paused until the thigh is fistulated, and they are in the motile orifices which all got purified and the humors of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the multitude of doctors cured him around two years, and I did not find in those wise men anything but skill in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh of him and the matters that flowed from him through those orifices for a great body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of him was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I introduced the probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I probed and scrutinized all the orifices and thoroughly examined those that were coming from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, and I thoroughly examined that corrupted thing, and it was already broken and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the thigh until it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I cleared away what was discovered by me and prepared the bone that was discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you should examine whether there is not corruption in the bone which is absorbing and separating, and you have already had a prolonged illness.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then cease the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then you should investigate and uncover the bone again according to the primary discovery, and attribute continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I seem to attribute that to me from that corruption, and then you should make a perforation to do the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discover it on the other side and do not cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you incise around an inch of it, and that extract its marrow, and then you restore it with those medicines, and it is consolidated completely and healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and sectioning of it except for the disposition of its fragility and for the paucity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it hastens in all hours to superfluous evacuation synchronizing with bad malady.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore health is through entire sanitation, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; it is made good the disposition of it in the healthy body and returns its virtue; and it is converted into its dispositions and does not make contradiction in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Perhaps it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already traumatized, then it is necessary that you section it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command to someone that they extend that to their own; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the primary ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the divided parts below, and you discover the flesh above the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause or place a table below the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw so that it does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the sawing be on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces a sawing from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, before it is one continued part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then pause below, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its generation.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp that, and mend that according to whatever disposition is possible for you, and in case something is generated, it may be rectified by you, when it does not make contradiction or harm to you.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you know what incisions and saws are to be made on these bones, according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare a whole species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you know that this operation means to you about the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long and connoisseurship of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of maladies, because then you have them for your metrics so that it is convenient for all maladies.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will then form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simple as those which proceed to your prohibition which you will experience over the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another sawing:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another sawing:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large sawing:
Forma de ray:	Form of a rasp:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rasp be according to the form of the head of a star-shaped claw, and the points of it are according to the form of the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable unless you have that rasp confected with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a major razor among others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a minor razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a lateral abscess:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of a wound that is properly opened: it is opened in an arc shape above the pus, and the member of the boy's thigh descends properly.
Forma de lu:	Type of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a abscess in which it has formed a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a subtle abscess otherwise:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another abscess of the curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small abscess resembling a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incision in which the bones have been cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of a smaller incision:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision; this one resembles a line, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a line that converges to a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and of sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and similarly it covers all the causes that we have said about abscesses and incisions and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities become putrid either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it covers that you incise that member within that which has absorbed the corruption, so that the malady escapes through that of death or of evil which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member becomes black within before it is judged that fire has already consumed it, or it becomes gangrenous near the blackness until the gangrene spreads into that member which is his and which takes all the body; and therefore you should not hesitate to make an incision of that one.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is a cause of corruption from percussion of certain venomous causes, such as of sea scorpion or of viper or of rhutella and of similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you incise at the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it worsens, then you incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than in cure is a quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly it happens to the foot when corruption worsens in the toe of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nostrils.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the edge of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it spreads into the ankle, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread above the ankle, then in that case it is not possible to do anything except to dismiss, and to leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch one ligament in the part where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until it is fully discovered; and then it is properly incised or sawed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it covers that one should place a cloth of linen on all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and aposteme is cautious.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if it happens that there is a flow of blood when operating, then you cauterize the touched area carefully, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured member with a ligament at a convenient time, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his own foot, this same accident which I and you have recommended, which is because of the blackness in his own foot with the adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption happens primarily in his own toe until it reaches the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for he has seen the cure coming to his member with the vehemence of what has been robbed of pain and of adjustment of it, and he incises that foot up to the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago it happened to him that same corruption in the finger of his hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I came to myself, and I thoroughly examined the excessive abundance that I had put on my hand according to the art of medicine, and it is not a reflection of the excessive abundance, but rather it begins to be absorbed into the other direction within me.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And I applied myself to insert my hand into it, and you do not want to do anything that would thwart the reflection of that excessive abundance, and perhaps it will happen that I will get a glimpse of the insertion of the dead patient's hand, because the truth of the disease was above all.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he disappeared from me, he returned to his own land and it became clear to me that the man prepared and inserted his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to be an aid regarding what is written about this disease, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in carnous members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of sania, and then it breaks and perforates, and it evacuates the sania, and returns to the place where it was before, like a vessel, and the code that is above it as a subtle drainage, and it does not perceive any further corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Perhaps however if the space is prolonged until corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to insert the entire code thus as it is revolving, and mainly when it is subtly drained and made into a subtle drainage, and it makes sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Perhaps if you suspect that the code adheres and that the corruption has not been achieved through further consequence, and in the code there has been a passage of time, then you should treat it with a clusters.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that I consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then clusterize that limb with Egyptian medicine, which is made of oil and wine and juniper, and receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes red and penetrates to the specific part of the honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take of it what is necessary and dissolves the limb in water and honey; and clusterize the limb on that sinus, and strengthen its orifice, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that limb with precision; and do it for so many days until the sinus is clarified and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some vegetables are clusterized in water of cinder, when it is not present to you this medicine; and it is that you take the cinder of vitriol, and put it over the water; and then cook that and clusterize that limb until you confide that the sinus is then closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the disease does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of cinder, then clusterize that limb with water and honey and mix juniper thrice, and clusterize that limb with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes adhere to the sinus, and mainly when in the wine there has been an excess of spiciness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this with some vegetables and you confide that the sinus is already removed, then clusterize that limb with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take of the dyaphonic ointment and dissolve that limb in oil of rose and wine with spiciness; or that you clusterize that limb with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is strait in which the canal of the clusterization has not been received, then you amplify that limb little by little, and pause in the water enveloped in Egyptian ointment or in basilicon ointment until it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is ample, then you add the lips of that limb to suture and leave a quantity of it in which the clusterization is added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of it from which the arm flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus below the place where it is in the arm, because when the arm is constricted at the proximity of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus until the environment of the pus below according to your will, then you should prepare the limb with preparation for which the arm flows more lightly according to what is apparent to you and that no cause of the arm is retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are paused over the sinus conveniently according to what you want to extend those over the course of life.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the patient's cloth is of such great quantity that it facilitates communication with the entire sinus; and place inside the forks in the right orifice of the sinus a small tube, and place another cloth on top of the other cloths of the swollen veins according to the quantity of the tube, and pause there for a long position on the orifice of the sinus so that it alleviates the swelling of the patient's arm and does not obstruct the large cloth unless you place another cloth underneath, which has been watched over one day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Perhaps that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which remains there for an entire hour so that it adjusts to what is just on the patient's arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And in order to know if what flows from the patient's arm is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you should consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is poured over the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or it has proper adhesion, then you may remove it on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the veins.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Perhaps from the sinus you remove a subtle virus, then do not despair of their adhesion, because the healing of the patient is promoted, because some homes are in those which slow down the generation of flesh in those plague wounds, and of those that are done in those which make the opposite of it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus you remove many days' worth of indigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like veins with dyaphoresis, when there is excessive superfluity of additive zeal.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last doctor who cured him is one who took veins with dyaphoresis and dissolved them in rose oil, and placed them on the patient's wounds, which are against their substance, and thus comforted that patient, and used it on him.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, veins with dyaphoresis, but rather it is gathered inside so that it is absorbed, and used on him; or that you take mirror and aloes and essences, and grind everything and pulverize over the honey which is on the focus, and thus line up above the cloth and strengthen that above the sinus; and thus that patient who has gathered inside so that it is absorbed, and pulverize above the cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some veiled ones are administered to him in long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and flour of errors and centaury, and use those simple or adjusted, grind them and crush and pulverize over the honey which he recommends; and thus use it on him.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the patient's chest, and thus you make inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure him with a fistular cure, just as it has been said before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the cure of painful joints and worn-out nails and incisions of toes added to the section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Painful joints are an abscess that often develops under the nail of the hand or foot, and it often occurs in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less expected, or it is abscessed by a hot abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws an arm inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts the whole thing, and it pervades its corruption to the bone inside so that it gives off a fetid odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and its color becomes darkish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that patient who has been mentioned in the division and does not conform to your cure, then it is necessary that you remove all the superfluity that remains from the nail and cauterize the wound properly, because the cautery is not useful in this way.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail wounds are already comprehending the flesh in the divided parts, and they begin to sting and thus that, then it is necessary that you place a subtle ray under the angle of the nail that stings the flesh, and they impel that beneath and remove that flesh to facilitate, and pause on what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines that burn inward so that it is totally removed; and thus cure that patient who has veins inward so that it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	Perhaps the corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary that you remove the bone and extract it, because at no time will it be healed if the corrupted bone remains.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption are in the finger, then you remove it from one of the nostrils according to its prescribed memory, and thus cure that patient so that it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail is deeply embedded or bruised, and deeply in that violent pain, then it is evident that you should start to release the patient's blood through a transverse incision below the nail, and be careful not to let the incision penetrate into the flesh that is underneath the nail, because you would aggravate the patient's violent pain, and it would cause an excessive growth of superfluous flesh at the site; and then heal that area with water that stops the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, this is adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, because they are entirely fleshy, and entirely so in their bones, or entirely so in their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is born in the nodes of the finger does not do harm, and this which is born in the joints is entirely swollen.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy, the incision is easier, and it is that you should cut away the flesh around the root with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its abscess.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in that which is born in the fingers with nodes, it is evident that you should cut away the flesh at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and then close with one of those suitable sutures convenient to water, and then heal that within so it may be healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation occurs when the fingers are stuck together between their joints, either by birth of the man who is thus, or by consolidation of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similarity; therefore it is evident that you should release that consolidation so the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between the sheets of the swollen veins with oil rosated so they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or pause between them a thin layer of lead plate so that it may be consolidated according to what is evident.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in the nodes of the fingers on the palm, then you release that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, they are varied.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varied, and they are enveloped by thick, full superfluous melancholic fluids which come from the members of the body, and their major occurrence is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is evident that you should administer purification of the body from black bile with some evacuated veins strongly, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of their iron is in two ways: one is that it should be cut and the black blood should be attracted, and the other way is that the vein should be elevated and all of it should be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of it is in this way: at the beginning of the leg with warm water pouring much into it so that the thick blood may be resolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, and then strengthen the patient's leg at the upper part above the thigh towards the lower part beneath the knee in a bandage, and then incise the vein in one place, or two, or three with ample incision, and then elevate the black blood in its own tube from the lower part of the leg upwards, and from below upwards, so that the quantity of blood you wish may be removed, and which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind it, and command it to abstain from the food that generates black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and the patient does not feel well.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is in this way: you raise the patient's leg, if it has many sores, and then put it in a bath and pour warm water into it until it becomes warm and the veins are extremely full; or it should be exercised with strong exercise, if the bath is not present at your location, until the limb is scaled.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then you should cut the skin at the right of the vein for incision in the loin or in the back of it beneath the knee, or at the lowest part of it beneath the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the skin with an incision and excavate the vein from every part until it appears to the sense, and it is of the appearance that sometimes that roughness declines to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you evacuate and from the skin, you see that whiteness which should be a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put beneath that vein until it is elevated and freed from the skin, and suspend it in an onion or a lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then you should cut another incision and then that incision for three fingers, and then excavate the skin from the part beneath the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then you elevate it and cut into the back incision of the ankle, and then extract it and elevate it until it is removed through the second incision, and then extract it from the incision that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And if you extract that from the section which is above all others or above all sections, then everything will be discharged; and then you will insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you are unable to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it, or introduce the instrument and turn your hand to extract everything from the affected part.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not lacerated; for if it is torn, it will be difficult to elevate the affected limb and it will come back over the patient because of that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the entire wound is exposed, then apply to the place of the clean ulcer a mixture of oil and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the life is constricted having twisted to the part that is involved, and it does not follow the rectitude as we have said, then you should confine yourself to the entire twisted part of it and the places of its involvement, and afterwards suspend it in uncleanness until it elevates the entire thing.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that your section does not cut the vein and does not harm it, for it will be difficult to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision is such that life is sectioned:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of an unciform operation:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to the one who is accustomed thus with unciform incisions nor of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having excess grossness thus as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the femoral vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs on dry and cold lands, just like Atigi in Arabic lands and in Indian dry and arid lands of little tenderness, where there are no herbs nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is generated strongly in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gesture of it is of putrefaction that you see below the gut, just as venom is infused into the body through serpents and worms and scarabs and worms generating between the gut and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the suspicion of its advent is of this vein that causes inflammation vehemently in the leg; and then the place becomes vesicated; and then the vein starts to issue from the place of that vesication, which seems to be a root of plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then it appears from there to the extremity, then you cover with a piece of lead of which is the weight of one drachm, up to two drachms, and mark that and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as the evil humors of that certain cause are present in the affected parts beforehand, envelop them in lead and fix it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you section a part of it and envelop the remainder; and do not section that root until it is fully discharged, for if you section it, it is constricted and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and putrefaction in the place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is fully discharged from the back of it and no remainder of any cause remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein it is said that some men who are in their longevity of 5 palms and of digits, and already I have reached 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is lacerated at the time of its medication, then introduce the instrument into the channel of it and perforate that long channel in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and afterwards cure it by curing apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein has many evil roots, and it is especially painful when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its very painful roots, and it is said that some people have a certain painful root.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so cure it thus as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease, because many evil humors are born from the flesh and it is a worm that is born between the gut and the flesh, and goes through all the body, weakening and debilitating, and it shows the sentiment of dismembering the gut and going forth.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of certain humors, thus producing worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the whiteness, then it breeds in it and enters and destroys the whiteness, and generates many evil humors.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And then when you want to cure that and remove it, then do not do so if you do not have the skillful walking and application of it to the sentiment, and thus know that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it in the binding and constriction, and then dry above it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deeply rooted in the flesh and does not retreat, then you stop cautery fire on the spot until it dies, and the main reason it is tempered is corruption of the limb, which corrupts the spot as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Perhaps you have sometimes seen that essence penetrating to the head of the vein, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and then dry above it, and extract that; and know that the patient uses for evacuation of the bad putrid humors of their body, and beware of generating corrupting matters.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	About the treatment of bad temperament.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named "nafir" in our land, and it is pain which occurs in some members, and then it spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that symptom which I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a sick woman in a village, and you uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it was rubbed for an hour, you saw that inflammation going away just as the swelling went down, but more slowly than it should be, so it seemed like silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain settled in that place and fixed itself in the muscle, and then you stayed there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then you ran to the other side of the body until you reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the entire body according to the symptom you saw; and it was too marvellous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And you had already seen that beforehand in my writings according to that method, however you have not seen many of the things that are retreated with pain being transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it in the writings as it was in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And you did not think it was that except that it is for that reason the woman was of vile, old body and discovered veins, and in this appearance the sentiment reveals that transferred windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-gradation in those who are delicate and have bodies with humid veins which are weakened.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the writing as we have said, then strengthen above it and let it dry slowly over there until that constricted windiness is released, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the usual writings, then you cure it by excision of the body and with that which expels windiness, and burn those foul pills and serpent-like pills.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of bloodshots.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Bloodshots are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they occur, because their diversity is that of those which have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and dirty ones, so they are solid; and of those which have three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with astellas.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the places in which they occur is according to two methods: because the members or principal members are concave, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, and bladder, and their similars; and then when you cut into one of these members and appear to you signs of death, which cause I recommend to you, then know that you should avoid extraction of that bloodshot in those where death is most disposed, and when you do not appear with those bad signs, and the bloodshot is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the bloodshot is when you cut into it, and it pierces the bone, and it is situated under the siphac which is above the brain, because it accelerates with vehement soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the writings, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the speech is abolished and the voice is destroyed, and it is situated under the place of the wound with white humid blisters resembling pustules, and you see of those similars to the corrupted flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And then if you appear with these signs, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the bloodshot, unless it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the bloodshot when it occurs in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and feels like it is fixed by a hard cause, and not a vague cause; and for this reason the movement of the bloodshot is similar to the movement of the pulse, and it corrodes with black wound, and it is that coldness of the extremities, and fainting, and syncopy; and then you know that death descends from all sides.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the blood vessels are affected by the plague that has inflamed the lung and is producing bloody spittle, and the veins that are close to the collarbone are swollen, and the color of the patient's face is changed, and they exhale a great deal of spirit, and demand urgent attention for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the plague is caught in the wrapping of the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes great and vehement pain and anxiety, and does not move all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the plague is caught in the stomach, then it makes the eyes of the patient suffer from some indigestion of the putrid matter.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the plague is caught in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, some fissure of the plague opens, or the fabric, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for a cure by extracting the plague.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the plague is caught in the bladder, and it blocks the flow of urine, and it creates some cause for the parts beforehand, and then there is great pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Maybe the other members also, such as the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjutants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similar parts, are saved according to the major dispositions when the plague does not obstruct a vein or artery and is not a venomous plague.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these plagues, so that they signify to you about the cure you need.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the cause, because when plague settles in the lacrimal duct of the eye in the root of the nose, and you extract it from one part to another, leaving the grayness of the aurelia, and it is healed, and does not occur again in the eye of the patient.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another plague from a Jew whose plague settled in his eye in the grayness of his own eye, behind the eyelid and also the plague was hidden and could not be achieved by that except for a small extremity that adhered to his own fist, and it was a great plague among the sharp plagues of the Turks, which iron leon did not have aurelias.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was healed, and there was no bad accident in his own eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another plague from a Christian whose plague was caught in the gullet, and it was an Arabic plague, and that is the one to which aurelias are applied; and then you inserted two guide rods over that, and it was submerged in the gullet of his; and then you subtly manipulated it, and thus I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another plague from a man whose plague was caught in his own abdomen, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, after forty days had passed and it did not move on him for any of its dispositions, I inserted into the plague and engaged with it, and he was healed, and there was no bad accident to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom a plague settled on his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and because he received proper treatment for seven years, the plague was rooted in the cavity of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom a plague settled in her own abdomen, and the plague was consolidated within her, and it did not move according to its dispositions, and the woman did not obstruct any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom a plague settled on his face and the plague was consolidated, and it broke out, not causing much pain, and many similarities to these plagues.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the plague from the man of the princes of the king that was caught in the middle part of his own nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole plague was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to cure him by removing the plague within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I strongly grasped the plague of the plague very tightly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle probe, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little beneath the aurelia on the right, and then I expected that the little puncture was for the extremity of the plague.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the plaster to the place where it was attractive and digestive, trusting that the place would become apostemated so that it appears to me as the place of the plague, so that it succeeds over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident in the place where the plague had achieved that location; and I continued to apply the plaster over it for many days and there was no accident; and the plague was consolidated meanwhile, and the patient's bad humor was removed from him within a space of many days until one day I felt the plague inside his own nose and recognized it as mine.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I paused over the acute corrosive medicine plague for many days until it became open, and with the probe I tested that, and grasped the extremity of the plague subtly, which adhered to his own fist.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And you should adjust the application of the poultice to the affected area with that acute medicine so that it appears visibly to me on the extremity of the arrow, and I will not delay for a period of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And you should then apply the poultice, and it is possible to insert the forked instrument into it, and remain there, and do not obstruct the examination, then you will not cease to subtly feel and ingeniously investigate on that manner of ingenious devices, until a day arrives when you begin to ponder those ingenious devices, pending you descend with forceps, according to the form of those in the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the poultice.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors thought that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you will restore it and the wound is consolidated, and it is healthy because of complete healing, and there is no longer any problem in it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which pauses give rule and significance about that which has not been said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend it freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans know how to compare little about motion; and they are aware of what is present about that which is absent; and they perform a new operation with a new instrument, which descends from the extrinsic causes of the art when it accelerates.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not forcibly removed from the members in which they are fixed, but rather according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where it enters; or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, and it is attracted and forcibly removed.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obstruct the examination of the time when it befalls, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh which is around it can putrefy, and thus alleviate the attraction of it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obstruct the examination, then leave it for some days and try to attract it with motion on any day, and already it will be forcibly removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obstruct the examination for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire part with subtle travel until the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the vents of the brain, and appears in the patient with some of those accidents which I have said, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it until the patient's condition is equalized for some days; because if the arrow reaches the vital organ, then death is not prolonged to him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed but only in the body of the bone itself and does not pass into the vital organ, and the patient remains for some days, and no accident occurs to him from those causes, then you engage in attracting the arrow and in attracting it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Moreover if it is slightly fixed and you do not obstruct the extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and then cure the place until it is healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Moreover if the arrow is already embedded in the place of the body, and it is embedded with sentiment, then you inquire into that tenderly, and if you feel it, then you attract it with some instruments which are convenient for the attraction of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the forearm, and here there are no bones nor nerves nor veins, then you feel over the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if you have the golden rules which are held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire part with all the genius that you can do; and ingeniously work on that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it is obstructed.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand with forceps on all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly work with subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that at your time, then leave it for some days until the parts which are in its circuit can putrefy, and then try to extract it because then it will be alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	Moreover if you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of inscizione of vein or of nerves, or of cord, and administer genius in all manner possible for the evasion of the arrow; and make it facilitated and tranquil and tardy and firm thus as I have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then you should contrast the wound by following the shape of the patient, according to which figure the doctor makes the alignment of the wound on them, because it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the wounds that are forgotten for the opposite part of the other party, or that have already proceeded to some part outside, or have made the extremity of the wound prominent by sentiment of the party above the codena propenda and sometimes that eminent; then you section above it; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then you attract it, because it is made lighter by experience.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to the contrariety until the wound takes hold in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And afterwards, leave that for some days, and then iterate it until you find ease.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the pus of the wound is in that, then you press out that matter from it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the pus is evacuated and you want to administer an impulse, then you introduce it, if it is dull, stir with a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the wound in the hollow of the wound and then press out that matter from it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the wound is concave, then you press out that matter with a strong instrument entering into it, because the wound is alleviated by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the wound is infected, then it is necessary that you excavate all the flesh in which it is true, if it is possible for you, and then cure it with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to section above it, then section above it and guard yourself from incision of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then cure the plague if it is indignant, and heal it until it is healthy.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The way to use forceps is that which attracts the wounds:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Like the extremities of birds with a beak like an eagle that are made sharp when they take hold of the wound so that they do not leave it.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made many special knots, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the wound and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of its constriction.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The way to press out with a concave instrument of this extremity is like the claw of an eagle, so that it alleviates the instrument inside the wound, and presses out that dullness.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The way to press out with a dull instrument:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a ray, so that it alleviates the instrument in the concave wound and is pressed out with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	About phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy, which ones usually customarily phlebotomize thus... of those that are in the head, 16. there are two pulsating veins which are near the ears, they say alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guides that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are thus: because among those is a cephalic, and it is of the wild basilica; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is dull, and it is a medium vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic jugular, and is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and funiculus of the arm, and it is placed above the forearm, and it is that which appears above the thumb for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein between the auricular finger and the smallest finger, and thus in the two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the knee of the wild basilica; and the second is sophena, and its place is below the leg of the domestic jugular; and the sciatic vein, and its place is below the leg of the wild basilica; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is for ancient and migrating, ulcerated, and catarrhal matters of the bad old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what you have recommended to you: it is that you should shave the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient on the occiput in the area where both veins are ample and good friction; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage entering between the two eyes and the areas around them, near the ears, at the two points where they protrude from the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the said place, and if you sense the pulse of those in the said place, here is the sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the hollow of the knee so that the flow of blood comes out.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand on the vein and knee to the upper parts and incidentally insert the vein at the incident point.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen the pulses and let it be so, until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already preceding in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arterial veins that are at the temples, the treatment of phlebotomy is for ancient and worn-out, evil, and persistent eye diseases and body full of acute overflowing fluids.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you have recommended to you: constrict the patient's seat with a bandage until the two veins appear at the manifest sentiment and perception, and then demonstrate the pulse of those in the said place; and then you will sense it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the knee above the vein to the upper parts in the said place indicated, and introduce the phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and lift the vein upwards; and insert it thus as you have done on the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause for an hour on the vein, and then pause over that joint and pulses and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and let it be so until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the reminiscence of them has preceded, and of those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the treatment of phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead is for the phlebotomy of the cephalic veins in ancient facial diseases and migrating, rough, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; so it is that the patient strengthens their seat with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, of which this is the form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and percuss over it with a pin or another instrument in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened in phlebotomy later, however it is not covered that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, unless it is of the lazy extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly adheres to the vein in the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More of the treatment of the two veins that are as lacrimal veins of two eyes for scabies of the eyes due to roughness and fetid discharge in the eyes, and for facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand steady over the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And make the phlebotomy according to the transverse at a length of a little while phlebotomizing a little, because in the place it is not flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly adheres the extremity of it, which is torn.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause over that joint, and strengthen it for one night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More of the phlebotomy of the vein on the nose is convenient for acute fever and strong sweat, and for facial diseases and migrating roughness that occurs in the face, and especially when it is ancient.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is that the patient strengthens their seat and then you place your left hand on the nose, and take the subtle phlebotomy instrument long and fix it in the middle place on the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear at the sentiment here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Look that you apply your hand in small touches on the little flebotomy and let the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it there for a new night, because it is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Maybe the juice of the flebotomy on the two guiding guidelines to constrict and begin with the leprosy and to extinguish evil ulcers and corrosive wounds, thus also with herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the patient strengthens below each one in the hollow column with a ligament; and it is fixed above the head of the patient, and the patient sits upon a seat.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then flebotomize the vein at the long distance with small touches on the little flebotomy; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, and make it similar to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the ligament and strengthen the two veins with a mild structure so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and lay him down at night because the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the juice of the flebotomy on the Algerich veins, which brings forth small abscesses and pustules from the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and to evil ulcers that are in the nose and in the circle of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that you make the patient cease within you, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then revolve his lips and regard the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and it is more because in the circle of those small black veins; and then you will inscribe each one for an incidental inscription.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Perhaps you have doubts below you, and you don't know which one is of those, then you will make an incision on the larger one of those, and of the most evident part of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it similar to the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Perhaps it is customary to correct by incising the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Perhaps from the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is then the flebotomy of the cephalic to precocious ones that are in the gullet, to the affliction of the uvula, and to afflictions of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomizing those is that you follow the patient between your hands within the sun, and raise his tongue, and regard below the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then flebotomize each one; and beware that you do not apply your hand in flebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are flebotomized in the body are those which usually correct in all the homes, and the flebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either they put in the flebotomy mirror-like or olive-green subtlety declining; or they dissect with a cutellar flebotomy, and apply it with gentleness, and this is their form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this gentleness is that it converges to a section and of those which are special sides and subtle according to the amplitude of the veins and according to their structure.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of flebotomy mirror-like:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the side of it also as times, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding with apparent grossness, and to those that contain thick blood in turmoil.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of flebotomy olive-green:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to a flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Perhaps the juice of the flebotomy on the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the afflictions that are below the gullet and the neck, and of what dries the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it converges to the flebotomizer, when he flebotomizes that one, that he should beware of that and be above-trembling in that, because below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so that he knows that he does not flebotomize with a pungent flebotomy, unless he is sectant with gentleness.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear for manifest appearance, then you know that you should leave it and move to another, or seek some other ramification; or you flebotomize at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and dissect it with a gentle flebotomy, just as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	Perhaps you want the flebotomy of the metacarpal, then you know that within the structure of the arm that you touch the place until you know the place of the pulses, and then put a sign above it with a tender hand; and then leave the arm and dissect the vein in a concave section with a gentle flebotomy, just as we have said; and beware that you make a percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you massage, with strong stretches the ligament, it swells in the area that has been injured recently, then that swelling is an arterial inflammation, and therefore it is necessary to evacuate that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows into the foot's veins like in the auricle of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it is from the artery's blood; and then you touch and pause the finger placed on that spot for a long space; and afterwards you remove the finger, and if the blood is absent, because many evacuated bloods are absent, then you stretch the arm and release it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And observe the patient's condition of their motion, and be above all afraid of it and do not touch it for several days until it is healthy.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not disappear, and it seems that you do not have present medicine for this, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is constricted, and the blood is absent; or take a thread of floss, and finish with that, and take one vein and stretch it over the area of the vein at the strictest point of the ligament and pulvils until another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is absent, it is good; and if not, then cure that wound with the remedy which is preceded by the remembrance of the place of the powdered abscesses to stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But the dark vein in the foot's venous network is juvenated so that it extracts the blood from the lower part of the head and to the lower part of the body; therefore because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware of the foot's venous network that is above all feared in the foot's venous network of it, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust on the punctuation of the foot and touch the nerve, it will happen to him stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and far from being completely healthy, And this nerve many evacuated appears at the sentiment; and if it is hidden for several hours and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the foot's venous network with which you foot-vein-networks in section of alleviation, and avoid the nerve with your forcelessness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you divide the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The juvenation of the foot's venous network of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and conveys it to the illnesses of the veins.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And beware in this property, if you want the foot-vein-networks to sprout on the olive foot-vein-network or on the myrtle foot-vein-network; because it is the safest of all the veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But emperor, it is convenient for you to see that the foot's venous network observes that on the foot-vein-network it does not sprout from the head of the lacert as only, and seeks the place most light, and does not touch it, if not found in the first percussion that it is above that foot-vein-network several evacuated.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But emperor, it is far from being completely healed in several hours, when it is not foot-vein-networked in the first percussion, but rather does not touch that aposteme.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the foot's venous network of that and its accidents are so many, in which you beware to think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of it is that you beware that the foot's venous network is not administered except in conservation of health and for the hope of it and caution of the occurrence of illnesses, and that it be done foot-vein-networking on one of the veins that are in the group, so it is: cephalic, dark, and basilica; and that it be done foot-vein-networking at the beginning of spring, above all in spring and autumn, and in winter apropos the consumption, when apparent signs of replenishment.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And it is done foot-vein-networking on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed since the morning sun.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	But foot-vein-networking that is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity at any time, or of night or of day, in every hour and in every time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And beware that if it is not foot-vein-networked until they are 24 years old, and a woman who is not foot-vein-networked except for the fourth month within seven, and the veins which have not been foot-vein-networked since they passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And since some people want to be foot-vein-networked for certain manias, beware that you mondify the six veins within the foot's venous network in the cluster of Leon, if in those there has been much retained, so that the veins do not attract superfluities in the foot's venous network of the veins, which are purified, and do not nourish the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And here is the translation:
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And here is the translation:
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And here is the translation:
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And here is the translation:
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And here is the translation:
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And here is the translation:
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And here is the translation:
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And here is the translation:
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And here is the translation:
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And here is the translation:
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And here is the translation:
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And here is the translation:
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And here is the translation:
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And here is the translation:
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And here is the translation:
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And here is the translation:
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And here is the translation:
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And here is the translation:
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And here is the translation:
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And here is the translation:
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And here is the translation:
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there is a dark or greenish discoloration in the urine, do not be alarmed; and if you want to, pause over that cause of retention or mirroring dissolution, or some cause of sugary urine or calming balm or similar remedy.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Many vigorous and accidental abscesses emerge from the excellence of the botanical flea-powder of the basil.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over that, and if then you feel a softness of the compression on that, then that excellence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you pause over that cause of that which we have said, because it strongly flows from the arterial sanctity.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make an emplaster in that which is stipulated, so that the place be hardened, and then cure that wound with another cure within, so that it be sanctified.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take out from the blood a quantity of his virtue according to the amount of his strength and according to the venturing color that appears over the blood, as it seems.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow out so that it be red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you let it flow out so that it be subtle; and similarly if it is agitated, until the acuity of it be stopped.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And take care that he who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in a vein, that the excellence of the vein be amplified and the flebotomy be broad.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and take care to extract it in gentle ways, and that the trachea be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best way to administer in flebotomy of a vein is that it be cross-sectional, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of flebotomy is safe from flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than flebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to the one who is accustomed to come into syncopy from the flebotomy, and take care that you cure it immediately after the flebotomy with a small infusion of milk or simple oximel scalded; and extract the blood in three gentle ways or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is of a complex composition, then take beforehand the flebotomy to infuse in a mixture of mirroring or in a mixture of aromatic mel infused with special spices, thus as with pepper, caneal, ginger and similarly, or in a mixture aromatized and very odorant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if it happens to come into syncopy from the flebotomy, and it is a cause of much blood issuance, then take care that you take in drinking warm water of carnation and a mixture very odorant and subtle; and use aromaticity with some galen, and it be limited to the few feet in that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use one of the other causes that we have said in the division on the chapter of syncopy for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood and dissolve the bad blood in a second way, take care of the one for whom the flebotomy is for much evacuation, and the strength of it is weak, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the strength in the continuing days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	However, whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood, and remove the bad blood in a second vein, and the body is strong, then do it around seven hours or nine of the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	However, whoever wants to attract the blood from the bad body to the opposite of the part where it declines, take care that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	However, that body in which there is much blood already scalded and it is acute and makes fever, take care that it be removed from the blood in one way and it be of great quantity and the perception be amplified until it comes to syncopy, since you have conserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and place your hand over the pulse of the body's blood, so that no death occurs in the place of syncopy, because many ways are deadly when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not take care when you want to unblock the arm and evacuate the blood in a second way, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult to issue the blood, that you press underneath with vehemence and incurve, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having let it be until it is flebotomized secondly; or remain with the acuity of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or pause over that of tyriaca alfarrach, or of sagzenea, and compress it with a gentle pressure until the blood be outside and flow.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation be settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to provoke evacuation of the blood secondly, and there is no excuse, then you bleed from that place or in another arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "arm vein" is blocked in the place of the fork or of the basilica, when it is not constricted or compressed, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the blockage of it is that the patient inserts their hand in hot water up to the point where the finger joints become inflamed and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then stretch it strongly over that limb in a straight manner; and then block it according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the perception be wide and let your blockage be such that you block it above the joint of the hand, a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are exempt from iterating the hand in hot water, and it is better to pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the blockage of this vein is more salvaged than all the other veins, because then it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the blockage of the little vein of the right hand is convenient for the illnesses of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the blockage of it is that you strengthen the hand in a straight manner or with your own hand, because you have put it in hot water, until the vein becomes inflamed and is clearly demonstrated to the judgment; and then block it transversely; and if you insert it into the whole, it will not make sense to remove it again.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And beware that you do not ultimate your hand in the blockage, because then it has denuded nerves of digits.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then iterate the hand in hot water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you pause over the vein with oil or salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly be careful that you do not make a straight cut in all parts.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the youthful assistance of the blockage of that vein of the left hand is that it is convenient for the illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the blockage of it, as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youthful assistance of the cephalic vein of the blockage is for the illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, as well as the illnesses of the matrix, and for the retention of menses, and for the illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs anciently, and for their similar illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the blockage of it is that the patient inserts their foot in hot water and makes friction on that place until the veins appear; and let it be on the joint of the foot in a circular manner; and the place of the vein has a apparent talon which gives off the little toes, and from there it ramifies into the face of the foot with many roots.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then block the vein more amply around the leg, giving off the talon, and its aggregation, because it is better and more healthy.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you block it on the face of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below there on the face of the foot, and pause your blockage in the way you blocked it transversely, lest you want to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the blockage be visible.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the issuance of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the foot of it in hot water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the blocker errs in the first vein, then iterate with the blockage on one side, because the place is healthy; and do not fear its evil, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do with the cephalic vein of the other foot in a similar manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the place is similarly as we have said, giving off the talon below the hollow of the silvan region.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the youthful assistance of the blockage of it is for pain of aching when it is due to blood caution.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the blockage of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and tightens and strengthens the skin of their ankle from the side of the narrow part underneath the talon underneath four toes in a long subtle band, because it does not appear except for that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, then you block it according to each engine that is at your possibility and transversely, and it is better; or insert it for insertion or section it for sectioning, because the place of it is healthy.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many homes very much loved; and if you obstruct it, and it does not appear at all sentiment, then block some root of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the auricular toe and the ring-shaped toe.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And take care of the nerves, and make run of the blood the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the structure and pause over the area of the fleubotomia cut, and strengthen the area, because the ulceration is healing.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of evacuation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Evacuations are made through the horns, or through the veins, or through the nerves.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And evacuation is done according to two methods: one of them is scarification and blood extraction, and the other is evacuation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this evacuation without scarification is done according to two methods, because either it is with a cautery or without a cautery.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 14 places of the body, of which one is behind the knee, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the arm beside the joint; and evacuations below the mandible, below the mouth; and evacuations of two spatulas; and evacuations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and evacuations of two fillets, and they are of two arms; and evacuations of two cavities; and evacuations of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And evacuation does not extract blood except from the small, scattered veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch the virtue through them, just as it happens with fleubotomia; nor is it known that evacuation is done with a cautery or without a cautery in any malady made by replication until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Sometimes it is necessary to provoke evacuation for illness or for continuity, administer that at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle place of it and at some time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men the blood is multiplied inside until it demands extraction through evacuation and attracts gravity and heaviness; and of those it attracts replication and rigor in their face and head, and in their neck; and of those it attracts prurience in their face and forehead and darkness and stupidity in their eyes; and of those who lose the place of their evacuation; and of those whose blood is multiplied; and of those who taste blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is apostemated and spits blood; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who vomit blood in their sleep with rigor and antiquities and plagues and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it happens in one of those causes, and especially if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then we command that evacuation should be done more frequently than two or three hours after dawn.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of evacuation from the neck is that when it confers gravity to the head and for this reason it is deep in the eyes; sometimes it is known that this is an opportune evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this evacuation is at the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic (head).
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not lawful to use that evacuation on him who has a complete fracture, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great nuisance.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason it is not known that the use of those evacuations is old, and in the heads of those who have frequent illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Sometimes it happens that he who is continuously on top of that evacuation is made to forget; and for this reason it is known that you command the evacuator to place his hand a little above the ventose at the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Sometimes evacuation of the shoulder is at the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and for this reason it confers asthma, and constriction of the wings and scission of the instrument of the wings, and to all, and replication.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is known that the evacuation of the shoulder is hindered a little, because if it is placed below, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the evacuation of the hagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and emigration, and prophylaxis, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the place of phlebotomy of the basilisque.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is known that you command the evacuator not to press his hand on the scarification so that he does not incise the artery and accelerate fluxes of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And evacuation below the chin confers a cold in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similarity to those illnesses that are in the mouth, and it is at the place of phlebotomy of the alihelic that are in both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Sometimes the evacuation that is done on the two spatulas confers a capitation, which is made by replication of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the evacuation of the two inner parts of the fillets confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, dark and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all those veins as well as the small veins in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins until it brings attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon to not proceed too deeply in the scarification, because the area is deprived of flesh, and thus his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a wound that is treated by applying compresses to the hemorrhages of the back and to the purulent ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And beware that you command the surgeon to make a large wound, and let it be of iron, because the area needs strong suction; and strongly his subtle wounds are scarified in the scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More wounds of the smaller veins are manifest for minor bleeding, because they attract the blood from the entire body, and they comfort ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke menses, and they comfort and alleviate; and they stand in place of flebotomy of two soporific, and galen, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, I must deplete the entire body and hasten to accelerate syncopes in many homes.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the wounds galen-style, the youthful appearance is proportional to the youthful appearance at the wounds of two veins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the wounds is that it stops the wound at the beginning of the vein and sucks for tempered suction, and does not prolong the position of the wounds, but rather pauses them lightly, and remains quietly, and that the humors come to the area for a favorable event.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the area already reddened and inflated, and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has tender flesh from rare pores, beware that you scarify him gently and do not push, so that the area is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the surgeon to amplify the scarification and make a small incision, and temperately facilitate the suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is gross, then beware that you scarify two gentle incisions, because in the first incision the way of subtle suction to the blood and its acquiescence is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second (incision) to the acquired perception of the extraction of the gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very fetid, then make a third incision for scarification, so that it cleans the posterior.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And afterwards, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we make many scarifications; and if we knew that the blood is gross, then beware that you scarify for profound scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the code only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that of which the code is gross, hard, dark, and the sieve pores are very narrow, beware that the places of the wounds are anointed with lenitive, resolving (medications); if it is in summer, thus as it is oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of bitter herbs, or oil of clemency of coil; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of blood, and to those that seem (similar).
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfloody is gross, cold, then the oil should be amaranth, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloe, or oil of anet, and to their semblance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More if the surgeon is of ample pores of tender flesh, then beware that it is prohibited from oil, and beware that to those places of wounds their own proper ventozation should be washed with warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of coil, or water of bordolaguas, and semblance to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that of which the blood is of much humidity, wash its wounds with agreeable wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And that of which the superfloodies are gross, wash its wounds with ancient wine, or water of sansuc, which is marjoram, or decoction of anet, or chamomile, and to their semblance.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And beware that the ventozation should be kept away from steam; having beware that it should be administered properly in front of steam for an hour or two, and beware that it sleeps properly with the ventozation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that ought to be regulated, a veined one, from phlebotomy before ventozation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Beware that you consider at the beginning: then if the surgeon or he who must phlebotomize is choleric and vents above the blood agitated and inflamed, then beware that you take causes of infrigidation, thus as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in agreeable wine and laytuguas, and secanabin, and julep, and to their semblance.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And stop their veins thus as pollets, and flesh of golden serpents, and veins constricted with grasping, and to their semblance.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the complexion is cold, it is fitting to take in wine and aromatic herbs, or essence of hemp, and sumac, and I want a strong odor coming from the fire between November and Christmas; and he should be commanded to use few clothes and to eat lightly, and to pause the wandering of his feet and thighs and urinating little and evacuating small intestines.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is fitting that on the day of windiness and flower-botany, the wine should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is fitting that wine be given at certain hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alcilita during windiness or during flower-botany or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtly purified; and I do not think that they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Maybe the windy things that are their scarification are windy things that are paused on the feet, and on the worse gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the inflammation of the ankle, because these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those things except to attract blood of a member, thus as I pause windy things on the worst gout in bad flux of blood from the blood of the veins; and I use that thing so that the cold windy condition is dissolved from the member, thus as I pause over the belly and the navel; because that rarifies the member and evacuates it and removes the pain since it resolves windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And already it is paused on the roots when they accumulate in their opilation or pore, because for virtue of strong attraction the humble opilation is fortified and eradicates the pore from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it happens when it is paused on the feet and worse gout, then windiness is enclosed in those enclosures.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these windy things are administered with juice and sap only; and some vegetables are administered at the fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vegetables are administered full of water and decoction in the bad gouty places.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is so that the windiness is filled and becomes greater, thus it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cooked for that convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of windiness administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orrifici be of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon be the width of a palm; and let it be in the latz of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the width of it, the trauc being small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of iron rod or citrine, with large margins, lion, and other things for so that it does not leave the member from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be in the middle of the vertical iron or iron rod, where a candle is paused at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this windiness is greater than the one which we have recommended; and the small remedy of that according to the gouty places and the state of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the windy things of old age are extinguished, so others than the windiness of the young and of large strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this windiness at the fire over the member is that it extends the wax decently denant a small candle of tallow, and pauses it over the middle of the vertical rod in the middle place of the windiness, so that the fire is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is paused over the member of the patient, and the finger is on the trauc that we have said, until when we have the windiness and do not induce that the finger opens and the vapor rises over that trauc, then the windiness will be almost dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And properly ignite the wax according to its manner, and thus it is induced if it is ignited from that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Maybe in windiness that is administered in the gouty place of flatness, with water, in which there is no vertical rod nor trauc, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is paused over the member thus alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this windiness the more it is great, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 148.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood-lettings are not administered in many members except in the members where it is not possible to position windiness, due to their smallness, thus as with the pot and gum and similarly to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, thus as the finger and nose and similarly to them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found blood-lettings which are in the watery places of purging world.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are laid down during the day and night in watery places until they are famished, and that no remaining cause is in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with flower-botany and windiness; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it reddens; and then they are paused over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and closed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the air from the affected area, it is more suitable for juvenation.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the affected area with warm water and add a lot of water; and it should be cooled and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood to the affected area is prolonged by the application of leeches, and it is resolved, then soak a cloth in cold water, and pause that on top until the resolution is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then powder with vitriol thrice, or gall and similar to their stippling causes, until the blood is abscessed; or place on the affected area the cooked and crushed heads of beans, and they will be absorbed until the beans adhere to the area, and the blood is abscessed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of leeches, when it is possible to move them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are forbidden from suspension, then cool the affected area with fresh blood or stick a needle in the areas until blood is obtained; and afterwards place them, for they sense some blood as soon as they adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, powder on them a little of thrice-tried aloes, or salt, or cinder, and it will happen soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not found anything in any time to be complete; and no one has admitted what comes after, except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, until they extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I direct my effort and study to the length of my own life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my own experiment; since here I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of prolongation; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it into many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections of bone fractures, from which the necessary precautions are, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and diverse ones, if singular.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	I will therefore outline in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters for the understanding of those which from the beginning are foreseen by the craftsmen and established on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art besides you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents occur due to fracture or dislocation or twisting or falling, then it is necessary that you take care at the beginning with fleshbotomy or alleviating that, or whatever steps, if no cause prohibits, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs suddenly, or old age in decrepitude, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and of meats of birds and of crustaceans; and prohibit gross meats and fill up on diets and all diet that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which they were accustomed to before.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And then since the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious diets of subtle and gross nourishment, thus as their diets are made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and cabbage, and fish, and beef, and fresh fruits, and gross and similar ones, and at this regimen is made coagulation of fracture by gentle and moderate treatment.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you know that the brittle bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for all time by the desiccation of those members, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs at the end of the lentitude, thus as the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The supreme nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause like glue in which it is grossly strengthened that adheres and strengthens until they are conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits them from their own works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which there is gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many varieties of fracture according to variety of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And we know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will come to a remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in a distinct chapter separate from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many varieties of fracture in the same bone.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture in the bone are diversified among themselves; because there is an arched fracture which occurs on the stars; and some veiled ones are made with a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagittal and stellar and proceeding and not-proceeding, as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to each species belongs a proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come to remembrance of it distinctly in its own places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by which is known a fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of it, and the eminence and appearance of it to the feeling, and thus of it when it is comprehended by your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the place, nor does it feel like a touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there is twisting or small fissure, so much that you cannot feel it with your hand and with total compression; however, pause over the bone of the medicines which I will recall at that moment what is convenient for the place; and therefore strive for a subtle strictness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And we know that the place where it is arched and not divided into two or another thing which does not occur in the sagittal, as it is entirely dislocated from its own comparison, then it is clear that you begin from your hour to rectification of it, because at that point it will reach apostema caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it reaches apostema caution, then let it be for some days until the apostema ceases; and therefore I will bind it according to whatever method you can of elevation and of ingeniosity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And we know that restoration of it and reduction of it is more difficult than the bone in which it occurs, especially in the sagittal.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And therefore I will strengthen it according to what will come to remembrance of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is sagittal, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And it is your position in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you perform that they return to their ingenious and natural place, according to whatever method you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware according to your strength that you do not fall on the patient during your operation, nor cause harm; and perform according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as a companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is clear that at that hour you profitably touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is some diverse cause, rectify it and bind it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do, who cause apostema caution through their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen that through the operation of many foolish doctors.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And therefore I connect, I equalize and perform decent operation and structuring of that member, and repose and tranquility; I admonish the patient about it and make them avoid that in the hour of their vigils and of their sleep, and see their revolution and agitation, and give their ejection, and give all their movements with all their virtue; and beware that the position of the member is a position in which the pain is assured, which causes because when sent to the disposition of the position of the broken or wounded member; then it is clear that you permute it to another disposition of it in which there is no pain; and look at it so that the position of it is direct and equal, so that the member does not twist when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because we know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the vein, and similar to those, then it is clear that the envelopment should be with a very subtle drap.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Those who have large thighs like a cushion or chest, it is said that in them there is involved a hard and lasting connection, because the ligament connects the large member strongly and equally in all parts, so that in it no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, make your evacuation of equity, place a convenient ligament on the water, above the area of that fracture in three or four wraps according to the member's merit; and strengthen your hand with a small ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see that it goes to the affected part above the area of the fracture, and strengthen mind that you do not force your structure on the one that has strengthened the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend yourself to the wrapping of the area of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure little by little, until you take hold of the area with a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other wounded area above the wrapping of the threefold area, and then see that the wrappings are on the affected part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the wrapping and in softening according to what we have said in the primary wrapping from above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the layers of the wrapping to stop the inflammation or swelling where the twisting of the fracture is engaged, if it is twisted; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then engage on these wrappings decently made so far, if in the area there is no inflammation or apostema to beware of, and then pause on the water that sits on the apostema and removes the inflammation; and let it be for several days; and then you strengthen on the same wrappings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the wrappings of the mixture of cannabis and lead root, be formed wisely; or of the wood of pine; or of strips of palm; and let each wrapping be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is fitting that the wrapping which is placed on that fracture be thicker and longer a little than the other wrappings, and the length of the strip according to what is measured on the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen on the wrappings with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then tie from below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the area of the fracture itself, and when it is more distanced from the fracture, it lessens the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is fitting that the threads be medium in thickness and subtlety, and of soft wool; and if the threads are too thick, thus as you have seen through the operation of several foolish pauses, entwining the threads of the cord of the tort, and it is a great error, when you cut the structure without equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And excessively thin threads are not so convenient, because you do not conserve the structure for the water that you want, and it is not fitting that between wrapping and wrapping there be less than a digit.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the extremities of the wrappings to the structure in those places, then pause below those that stop inflammation or burning heat until it does not make a lesion.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some wounded fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that all torn members are not straightened with wrappings on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not fit to pause on the wrappings unless for five or seven days or more, according to your secure expectation of the arrival of apostema beware.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the implanters in which the Ancients restored, those who were placed on fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of implantation as an abbreviation of restoration of fracture, convenient for complex movements and majorment to the veins and joints, because it is about that on which there comes no heat nor cold: and it is that you take dust from the mill, and it is the marrow of the farina that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you find that thus as it is, except that you gather it in an album of skin, and pause the complexation of the non-spaced or subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manner of restoring fractures and dislocations: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is made from millet grains salvage, one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one drachm; alochil one drachm and twenty; all are mixed and stirred together with water or album of honey if the complexion of the patient is cold; and then use this restoration, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones moderately, and confers a lot of comfort.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manner of restoring which confers on a fracture and twist: recipe of migrach and white altaea one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one drachm five; of acacia one drachm six; of Armenian boil one drachm twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All grind to mortar at the same time, and crush well, and mix in water or in white album of egg and it shall be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manual of setting bones for joints and separated osses from their places, and then accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: take a woolen thread and submerge it in warm oil and cut it and place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Moreover, in this setting, there is not virtue of restoration, but rather a cautious expulsion of pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another manual of setting that restores broken bones: take fig leaves of a sweet sort and poppy leaves preserved; mix all together and make an emplacement of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manual of setting abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining aposteme: take root of clay, of chamomile and violet flowers, of barley flour, all together in a partition. Grind all together and mix in wine, if the member is not scaled.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	Moreover, if it is scaled, then make a compress with water of sweet marjoram or with water and use it thus.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another manual of setting strongly resolves that this first, when apostemes harden for the restoration of the member: take root of clay and of hemp seeds, and of balsam, and melilot, majoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all together in a partition; grind all together and mix in water of sage or in water twice distilled or in wine, all according to the quality of the member and the repair of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Moreover, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it should be placed on the member trembling for its restoration, but rather a mixture of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be balanced between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Moreover, Gualia has seen that it should be placed on the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is exsiccation of little heat, thus also with myrrh, and similarly to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manual of setting that comforts lesion and pain: take migat, of cedars, of inner skin of a wild man or pennyroyal, and of clay, and salt, mixed together; grind all together and crush well and mix, and make an emplacement.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Moreover, the quantity according to which one covers the wound and it is dislocated, is that you consider if there is no pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken nor moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is a violently painful place or swelling or inflammation, then you should touch or delay it at that hour, and remove the setting from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a draught of lion's humour and marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then let it rest for an hour; and then place on it a woolen thread submerged in warm oil or rose oil, and bind it around for a night until you are certain of cautious aposteme, and that it has repaired the inflammation of the member, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle structure and small setting, and do not strongly bind with your primary construction, but rather subtly until it is healthy.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if at times the aposteme and roughness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are so completely removed, and you have need of setting and structure, then apply that thus as you have begun the entire treatment from the start.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there does not occur to the member any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not delay it except for three days or four or five. and some wet applications all together are left on for 20 days according to what appears to you for the dislocation of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure entirely, and assist in the thickening of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Moreover, if you find the place of the fracture is dry and thin more than it should not cover, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from arriving at that; and therefore embrocate it with warm water throughout all the wet applications that delay it; and it is in all three days; and loosen the structure a little, and by this operation correct the member's nourishment, and it is healthy gradually.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than it is customary to make the restorative remedies for a fractured limb otherwise treated when not initially restored, according to which they converge, and it is restored according to twisting, it is an error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were to increase the ancient liberties and gain control over what has been done.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of theirs that it does far, because it is more reasonable that it does not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: Of the fracture which occurs at the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of a bone, and the percussion occupies all the bone within the cipher, which is beneath the bone, thus as if it were in the fist, and for this reason this species is named ascial; or the bone breaks into some part of itself, and breaks the flesh around it and does not pass beyond the rear of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and the cause of it is percussion with a heavy or falling object on stone, and its signs are similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that already approaches the peritoneum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture it is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made or by falling or by percussion of stone and its signs are similar, which makes some layer of the bone enter the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location thus as it occurs at the edges of the erema when it occurs at their percussion and it is part of their entrance into the divided parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it is made in the bodies of humid bones, thus as they are hollow and empty.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are saturnine, so they are pesky thus as separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find the remedy for all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will reveal all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tender and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is above them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is recognized by this that it is discovered above the bone, and it is cleared, and limited to its tender part, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the malady, and then if you times for the accidents that signify by manifest significance on fear, thus as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of vote, and syncope, and acute fever, and settlement of the veins and rigor of those, and similar to their accidents in the major dispositions, they are not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you find non-concurrent accidents you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is because if it has come to you the plague at the beginning as it is a plague and it is in the days of winter, then it converges that you study in the osteament of the bone within the 14th day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it converges that you touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the peritoneum, and that the accidents we have recounted happen.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the peritoneum covering the brain, and it is among divided parts and attraction, then it converges that you insert the comminuted and attractive part, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you raise the head of the malady plague, and discover above the bone according to custom and manner possible for you according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter above the malady.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it occurs to you to make the detection of the bone, either blood or aposteme caut, then you oppose yourself to what converges, and it is that you fill the place of draps infused with wine and rose oil, and make repose the plague until it be sedated by the aposteme, and be sure of the flow of blood; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you insert the bone with an instrument of straight talent, and this is its form: And then administer another instrument like this, a little wider later than that; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more instruments wider than the one mentioned.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it converges that you have the name of diverse instruments, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use of their arm has facilitated percussion on the affected area so that it does not touch the head and lead to that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then you should perforate in the circle of their teeth while administering the affected areas with non-deep probes.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And it is not called thus, but rather because those do not touch the term of the bone of the head to that which is near them, so that the round extremity or margin above that which is beneath the head appears like a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passes the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these probes which almost converge at the thickness of each bone, so that they are present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is acute, and the quantity in length and breadth is according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of probes: The quality of perforating in the circle of the broken bone is that it pauses the probe on the bone and revolves it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then pierce the probe to another place, and pause there where it is throughout the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you insert the probes into the affected areas that are between each part of the bone, and make a subtle pus that you place on it in the end of levitation, as we have said, so that you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause to stir up the instruments which will be prepared for it, as we have said, and with subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And take care that you keep the probe with total caution so that it does not touch any part of the cranium.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus you will have circled the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cranium if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted it, take care that you scrape and equalize it in the roughness of that which is in the bone with another instrument similar to a probe, but rather take care that it is a subtle pus and more subtle than the other probes.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you remove some small parts of the bones and cartilages, then take that which is facilitated in that which is due to you from the instruments; and then cure the wound with ointments and unguents which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another manner of operation is gentle, far from pain, which Galen and the expert say is for great relief; and this is its sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, so that when you have discovered that part and placed beneath it the gentle and light extremity of this probe, this is the form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is gentle and does not touch any cause, and the acute part is of it in two layers ahead in length, as we have said; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the cranium on the face of the incident acute bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you percussion on the probe of a part with a small hammer until you have perforated all the bone in a facilitated way as it revolves, and you will be sure of the panniculus that does not fall into the accident that you fear in no manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if it were dormant.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Then if you remove some annexed cause from the bone of the panniculus in certain places of the bone, it will perforate that of it with the extremity of the lenticular probe, and deliver that of it in a facilitated way, because it is delivered from its noument and its pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is abstracted or separated from the bone is the face of it, and you remove its roughness and subtle cartilages, then take care that you scrape that roughness and radiate those subtle cartilages with subtle razors for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible to administer them in every place where they are most convenient and most direct according to what you perceive as the goal of your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And take care that you administer in your reason where it radiates the bone at the beginning of the most latent of those razors, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you reach administering the most subtle and thinnest parts of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Moreover, in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, take care that you administer cure according to what you perceive as the goal of rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not diminished over all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And thus about what we have written, we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is retracted when you radiate the bone, then take care that you take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rozated oil, and place it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another double or triple drap and submerge it in wine and rozated oil and place it on the primary drap, making it as gentle as possible so that it does not irritate the cranium; and then administer above the latent liament, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has, so solamente.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And that medicine should be administered for one or two days before being certain of apostema's caution; and then remove it and administer medicines which are excessively drying, thus as a mixture of linseed and farina of bitter herbs, and powder of ginger and aristology, and resembling those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make powders of these medicines which are powdered over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer all this proprietary medicine of which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware that your virtue is not in the wound's cure being dirty; and it should not be in the excess of ointments nor another; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls upon the siphac of the head, as if the bone is mondified and majorly when the cure is misprescribed, and it is negated on the surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with accidents that we have said, knowing that it is perilous all told.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not fall upon the blackness but from the medicine that is paused above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then you should take a mixture of honey and rose oil, three parts. And apply those liniments as a bandage, and then pause that over the siphac; and then cure it with the species of cures that converge within so that it may be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is bruised.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You know that it is not bruised on the nose but rather two parties simultaneously swollen, or one of those alcune veins, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not bruised and does not fall upon it except with atrition and tortuosity and sinew.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parties of it is bruised, then you should introduce the small finger into the nasal cavity, and that you should bind that fracture with a bandage, and with the small finger beforehand, until the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do it so that you may facilitate it, and beware that you do not fall into that operation on the patient's malady.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper swollen party of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then you should equalize it with the extremity of a rod on which there is a small groove.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parties, then you make a similar thing to that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the apostema's caution.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one party, or half of two calves, if the fracture is in two parties, and it should be in the calve with as much quantity that fills the tract of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calves should be wrapped in bandage, and should be changed every day, but it has not been seen by me; however, I think that the piece should be wrapped in album of cotton or comfit with powder of millet; and then leave the water until the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some veins are introduced into the nose, in place of a calve, penalty of water that is enveloped with cloth of linen and lead; and it is that you already have the fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do calves.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another vein of apostema's caution falls, apply the nose with cerote or cotone infused in wine and rose oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if apostema's caution does not fall, then you should apply beforehand with flour of Sizami and powder of ginger cofitz in album of cotton; and then pause over the gold stopper, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are bruised with a small fracture or so comminuted, then you should split over those, and extract those with instruments that converge upon those; and then sew the split, and cure it with that which incorporates and consolidates, and applies to that convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound falls on the nose, then you should cure it with calves and administer pipes of lead until it is entirely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is bruised.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a wound, consider then if the fracture is beforehand so solitary, and it is not bruised in two and is curved to the parties within, then its cognition is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the index finger of your right hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the index finger of your right hand; and thus you will feel the jagged edges of the fracture and facilitate the reduction of the displaced parts before, with your other hand on the opposite side of the bone; and thus you will make it easier to set it in place.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two, then you should administer extension of the two parts according to the rectitude within, so that it is possible to set it in place.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter dislocation of teeth, then strengthen those which seem to be held by a thread of gold or silver or copper; and place a pause on the cracked jawbone, and place a pause on the duplicated wrapping, and a pause on the large stellar bandage decently made, or a single layer of equal length along the jawbone; and thus you will bind it according to how you have prepared the ligature and so that it is convenient for application, so that it does not get destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and abstain from eating heavy foods for a while.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has been altered in some way, then you should touch and feel it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made of soft powder, album of egg, or flour of chamomile, since you will have removed the crust from it, and place the poultice on the affected area for a while.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then add cum sta annex and adjust the poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, so leave it, until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; because many weakened fractures are straightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another weakened fracture occurs with abscess, then administer what we have said for many weakened fractures in the treatment of it until it is healed, and remove that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a plague, then consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or splinters, then you will subtly remove those splinters in a way that is convenient for their removal with the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the plague is narrow, then you will enlarge it with a flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and none will remain, then you will close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place one of the poultices that are convenient for it and encrust it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the forearm when it is injured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many weakened fractures are broken in the forearm near the elbow, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch splinters; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that splinters form in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and holds the broken forearm, and the other extends the vein to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then bind the fracture with bandages until it takes the form of it according to its nature, and it is not in a state of little eminence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is convenient to place beneath the patient's bed a mattress or a woolen cloth, and its greatness according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the forearm and bend the hand with your own hand until it binds the fracture according to its nature.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the forearm to its former parts, because it is perverted to the prono, then it is convenient that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion under the muscle of one side, in great size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister precedes the muscle of it to the parts below until the bone of the forearm is elevated as it is in the prono itself, and then you rectify the fracture and bind it with bandages.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters of the forearm and it is swollen, then it is convenient to make a poultice over that and extract those splinters to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you will make an incision of it with one of the instruments which have been prepared for that, since you had placed beneath the forearm the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a scoop of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the littleness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the operating table should be such that it is as accessible to you as possible during the operation; let there be two extensions at the ends, one extended and the other contracted.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have made when you extracted the abscess from the bone is large, and you are certain of a cautious post-suture, then adjust both lips of the wound to the suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear a cautious post-suture, then fill the wound with drainage and powders according to the quantity of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you suspect a cautious post-suture, then pour in drainage with vinegar and rose oil, and pause over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The structure of the bone when it is wounded and sectioned, is that you pause to apply a plaster made from flour of millet in album of wolf'sbane, and pause over the joint, and then pause to spread the splint beneath the title of the bone, if it needs that, and then take a humectant, so that it does not torment, which holds the Sarrazis, which should be moderately long, and its width is about one palm or around that; and then sprinkle double-layered powders over the joint and plaster; and take a subtle wooden board of which the width is three fingers and similarly long; and envelop that in a cloth, and envelop that cloth on the spot above the fracture site; and then pause to humectate thus revived, and revolve that over the neck of the bone and beneath the title of the bone, both beneath the title of the bone and beneath the title of the patient's thigh, and return that over the entire affected part, and when the structure of the fracture is fully restored, and it is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, that the board is not moved away from the broken bone; and for this reason you will see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is softened or the board is already removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the bond.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then pause to let the patient sleep on their neck, and place beneath their title of bone, so that in the night a small cushion supports their neck; for thus the adjacent muscle of theirs is elevated from the side of that, and therefore the fracture of the ribcage is elevated by the muscle; or it is the arm of theirs tied to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament unless you suspect it in the spot of the abscess or post-suture, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the bone up to that point, and adjust it to the structure and restore it, so that it is restored and the fracture of the ribcage is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some vegetables eaten at home are made in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in the lateral spot of the bone and it does not break unless at the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when the bone is broken in its spot — and it is broken in the middle spot of the bone — and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture it is necessary to prepare the bone and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner possible to you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then pause over the spot powdered with flour of millet in album of wolf's bane and joint; and then sprinkle double-layered powders of cloth; and then pause over the subtle wooden board according to the quantity of the entire shoulder blade or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the board is concave in some of the spots of the shoulder blade, then you bend that concavity to the joint, and then adjust the board according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it below with a long humectant, with gentle compression and firmness of the board, so that it is not removed from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament every day; and all vegetables that are softened, another vegetable and strengthen it and adjust the board if it is removed from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And let the patient rest on their own side thus.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the shoulder blade is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this number is complete, then you loosen the ligament, and you will know for certain that it is one of the bones which begins to heal without its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the spot of the bone to the ankle and place beneath the codena, then you should divide it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the ribcage, with caution of post-suture abscess, if you suspect it here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of fractures of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, some vegetables are broken in the middle spot of it and that is why it ends; maybe the extensions of the bone are very short, cracked and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	From the accidents of the patient when their spine is broken it is that which declines into the divided parts and accumulates in the great pain, and difficulty in the breathing, and thus, and strong and vomits blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be repositioned on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulder blades; and then prepare the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs to the hands of two ribs, and subtle in the operation of it and in the equation according to all manner that is possible and that converges to it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice on the wound and stop the bleeding, and place above it a subtle table of sage or of calamine and of its similar lightness in elevation, since you envelop it in a wrapping; and then subtly adjust that over the broken bone so it is not moved; and go to the binding according to the returned tone of some evacuated veins, and strengthen that with a decent structure; and then consider the binding at all times, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that corrupting corrosion or pus, or pain, or abscess that accumulates in the area, then cut and dissect that and eradicate the wound and rectify what accumulates because of it in the manner of curing it; and then return the wound, if sometimes it faces you; and adjust its structure until it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of their part from within do not accumulate to those contradictions unless for what is cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, because of the inquiry into its defects.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is thus that it equals the fracture with its defects according to the possible manner, until it is equal as it was, and then wound and strengthen the broken bone with a star, if it needs that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines into the divided parts, then it accumulates in the patient vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that accumulates in one who has suffered a fall, and because of which the bone puts forth a swelling; and it accumulates in the difficulty of breathing, and thus, and vomits much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Antics were ingenious in that with many ingenious remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they said that it is necessary to pause the windings of the patient that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed back into its proper parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We must avoid that for fear of generating a warm abscess, if it does not accumulate; and if it has already accumulated, then it helps towards that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said that some of them should be paused under the windings and then sucked with a strong force; and it is similar to reasoning, but I, the emperor, fear that the windings will attract the superfluities to the area due to debilitation.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they said that some of them: it is necessary for the area to be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and then paused powders between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is equal when you envelop it according to the returned tone; and then the patient is cured with a cure of poultices and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it causes vehement constraint to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth a swelling with painful puncture, fear over the patient, then it is necessary to fend off from the area, discover the broken rib, and then pause above that instrument which preserves the scaphoid, the remembrance of which precedes, and that inserts the bone with facilitation, and extracts it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and cure it with wounds until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it accumulates into an abscess, then you cut and pour powders in rose oil and pause above the area, and the patient is cured with what is necessary for the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And it is repositioned on the mattress on which one sleeps, until it is healthy.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fracture of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some evacuated veins show fracture in the bones of the neck, and it is necessary to attract them to their proper place, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And with that it accumulates to some and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider, because sometimes the veins are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those and when they constrain those in the tender defects or prick those with a needle and do not feel pain in those, then you know that it is not healthy, and in the same disposition it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if those veins are constricted and stuck in the narrow passages, then you know that the patient's back is saved and that the sick person will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then examine their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you find that they are already weakened, it means that what has happened to their limbs, and when you sit on the patient's back, you feel ventosity and egestion of their will, and some evacuated fluids are repositioned on the patient's back, wanting to urinate and unable to do so, then you know that they are mortally ill, and therefore do not struggle with their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Perhaps if you don't find any cause for this, the cause is hidden and more subtle.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you perform a sedation of the abscessed aposteme because it presses on the irritated vertebrae or at least on the two humors; pause on that until some evacuated fluids are released during the day until the aposteme is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply some comforting and soothing emplasters, and strengthen that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you find the root of the bone's dislocation or some cause that has already separated from it, then uncover the codena and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, sewing it up if it is large; and then cure that with an encarnation of the enguents, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Perhaps if the bone's rear part is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then uncover that you introduce your finger into the anus, and reposition the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for secondary alignment; and then apply an emplaster and astelha, if you need those, and then strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken vertebrae in it, then feel around that, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the Restoration of the Narrow Passages.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrow passages are easily broken, and if they break, the fracture is only communicated to the extremities of those and are inscribed in their length and decline towards the internal parts; and you find pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is on the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you reposition that according to what appears to you as equal alignment until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Perhaps if the fracture is in the loins or already declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their back, abdomen upwards, until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have repositioned that, apply an emplaster to it, and then apply a bandage of wood or of codena, and strengthen it with a stricture on which there is no threat of puncture of fracture nor movement of the bandage.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And reposition the concavity in that which fills it until it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Perhaps if you find an abscessed aposteme, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscessed aposteme is sedated, and apply to it what surrounds that according to what precedes; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen that thus as it convalesces.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you find them in the vertebrae or they are communicated, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Adjacent Parts.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjacent parts are those that are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take a wooden board placed beside the middle groove according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie them in two extremities with two bandages, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And seat the patient on a chair; and then put the broken arm on the wood until it reaches the tiny part of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over some heavy cause or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor examines whether the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns according to its convalescence.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their back, cervitz upwards, and suspends the hand of the neck with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds the pus below it; and each of them extends to their respective part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then stretch over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and almost all of the two ministers extend their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	So if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the citellum and the other half below the fracture towards the hip.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the hip, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that place and over that hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Remove that which is obstructing and gives trouble, and then apply it according to what is necessary and apply it for good application, then stretch it if it does not cause an abscess or aposteme.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if it causes an abscess or aposteme, then lay a stricture within seven days, and pause on the woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rose oil until it rests and the abscess settles, and then you stretch it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the manner of stretching it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place an envelopment of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adjunct, and place your hand over the surrounding muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and stretch over the adjunct, the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stilts.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that stilt which is more laden and stronger than the other stilts; and place between each stilt the width of a finger, and let the length of the stilts be according to the break with an addition of three fingers of the whole part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then stretch over the stilts with the stricture which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your stricture over the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more healed, the stricture should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you observe the situation of the stilts and the stricture as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its original position, then you do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess or aposteme, then you lay aside the stricture and the stilts until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not cause discomfort or inflammation; or it is forbidden to bring food to the member by disposing of the superfluity of stricture; and thus rectify everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that it does not cause any harm from this, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place on the adjunct a cushion full of woolen padding, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, thus rectify everything according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient's food according to the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then it is necessary to increase the amount of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Since the custom of the adjunct and of the leg is that they are strengthened in 40 days; and then it is necessary to loosen them and administer a bath and be medicated with ointments which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is badly bruised, then you do not loosen that bandage and stilts for a month or until two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; one of them is small, and it is the one that is called the wrist, and the other is large and is the one that is placed below the small fork, from the part below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And sometimes the larger fork is broken alone, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller fork is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fork of it is broken above the fracture, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the smaller fork below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small extension with a facilitating instrument until it is healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger fork is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a stronger extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both forks are broken together, then it is necessary to make the extraction more forceful.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to make the figure of the hand in such a way that its restoration and extension are stretched out over a hip, and the palm of the hand is at the parts above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be seated on a curved chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	It is a cushion placed beneath them in the altitude or direction of their body, so that the patient does not encounter trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then one minister extends an arm from the affected part, and places his hand or limb, and another minister extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor wraps the bone inward so that it returns to its better shape as much as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture of the bone is dislocated, then you must make an effort to reduce the entire mass in its proper place with your manual strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in the separated fracture that you have touched the code and it is not your hope for its restoration, then you finish above it and leave that according to the manner which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	Perhaps the fracture is a plague, and you have already made a special agreement about that capital, and so take care of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you find an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then lay a layer of cerote oil mixed with white wax and rose oil, and it is better between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the layer over that in a subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerote and pause to apply a plaster prepared from powder of molten clay, and place stilhas; and let the stilha be the one that is paused over that fracture so it will heal and strengthen.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you know that the number of stilhas on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is the fracture in a focus or in two focuses together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then pause your structure over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when perhaps the extrication is to the upper parts above the fracture or to the lower parts below it, pause the structure a little more slowly according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the layers that are wrapped around the fracture are very humid layers, and they are not hard nor rough, and the thread which is stretched is the one that is better suited to be between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and its ligament to be almost healed after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you find some cause for which rectification is necessary, as we have previously mentioned, and then it is necessary to rebreak the limb with warm water until that rectification ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return to the structure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extrication is already mollified and the bone is already remodeled and resembles those, then rectify everything with your manual strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider that perhaps the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excess of structure, because then it is necessary to mollify it a little and let it be for some days until it runs to that nourishment, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Perhaps if the patient does not find any cause among those that we have said, then it is not necessary to delay until about 20 days or around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the hand of the patient is suspended by its own power of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the strength.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the ankle and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that in the ankle of the hand and the joints of the fingers, fractures often occur, and they do not find their place unless with carefully prepared remedies.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when you find a hand fracture or dislocation, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a straight line and align themselves according to equality, and then pause the hand of theirs on that extended part.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor wraps them inward so that they are conjoined in good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply plaster and stop, if you do not find an abscess at the beginning; and then pause the stilha below according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in a layer of cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	Perhaps the splint is on the inner parts of the fingers at the belly of the palm, and then make a layer of cloth resembling a bandage, and command the patient to strengthen that with their own palm that is splinted; then it will be strengthened in a long bandage.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the stilha of the body be in a layer where it is elevated, so that the body is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Perhaps if the fracture is in the fore parts, then it is necessary to pause below the stilha and another stilha of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is bent and straightened; and then pause the structure, as the hand is revolved between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you find a fracture at the knuckle of the fingers, then it is the finger joint, it should be wrapped according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, pause at the small straight stilha for so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other digits, thus as in that of the middle finger, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the anular, then it should be straightened and aligned according to the direction of the digit; or if all the fragments are continuous, and it is better; or stop above that small star, thus as we have said in the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and also place that, the disposition of an abscessed cautery and oppose - it is a tie-up operation - it is what covers when it reaches some cause of those, according to how the narration of it is repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the hip joint are bruised and broken, and it is declared by sensation according to how they are converted into pain above and below.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their belly and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then extend the minister entirely to the ligament at its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is proposed to reduce the hip joint, then the ligament is placed below the knee at the part of the thigh, so that the extension takes place in itself, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the bruise is proposed at the knee, then it should be made with the ligament placed at the knee, and the extension should be at the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor unites the bone with both hands inside so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it covers that it stops in plaster and structure, if it does not reach the affected member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it reaches the affected part, then you leave it like that for some days until the abscessed cautery is calmed, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The structure of it should be done thus: it covers that you wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and double it two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and the hip joint.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long wooden splint between the hip and the leg proper to the knee below, and they come to the extremities of the wooden splint from the part above, and then revolve around the leg and the hip joint so that it surpasses the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then stop above the hip joint in the place of that fracture thus, and stop one star above the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill in the voids between the leg and the hip joint with many cloths, so that the extraction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong structure above the middle of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have loosened the ligament at the place of the fracture, your structure should be less and lighter and more gentle.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the wooden splint to the parts below up to the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the stars of the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the structure on that, thus so that it does not reach the corroding member nor abscessed cautery nor inflammation and similarly to those; and if it reaches some cause of those, then cut you off from the disunion of it, and rectify what reaches all at once, according to how we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a piece of bone that it can put, then it covers that you unite it according to how it is possible for you; and if not, finish above it and remove it, and cure what is preceded by the remembrance until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some times it is strengthened, this fracture of the hip joint or other that are adjusted to its stars, thus as we have said in the adjutant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of it, in such a manner that it does not reach the patient's lame condition; and if it is restored alone, or another that the other leg should be applied, then it is necessary that it limps from what was previously.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the hip joint is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of fractures of the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that fracture of the knee joint sometimes ends badly, but it reaches many times to its atrition.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If it reaches the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and above that all is established according to the sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is thus: that which is reunited with what has been broken off from its parts, and it is added and joined together according to what is possible for equality and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And you should stop the bleeding and place a plaster on that round wound, if it is indented in that way; and tighten below with a strict bandage to make it suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And you should consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, also with an apostema of caution and similarly to those in which it is opportune to oppose every accident that occurs conveniently until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle and is named ankle.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some species of fractures that affect both bones of the arm, and for this reason a restoration of it is made similarly to the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into many parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the smaller bone is broken, the leg is converted into parts of the Ankle.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is broken, you will encounter those symptoms, and it is for those reasons that they are not easily cured.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligamentation of the tendons according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Moreover, Emperor Cove, if the fracture of the leg is not having many troublesome symptoms, then the extension should be milder and less frequent, and it will help your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you engage the tendons and complete all the tieue operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the palm which are placed beneath the causes that are placed in solutes, and so make a gentle movement of branches of palm; likewise from those to the ones that have small grooves, and do not make gestures with the hands, and let it be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the smallest beneath.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then envelop it with a certain drap in two envelopments according to its length, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so from the knee down to the smallest base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two tendons in three places of the extremities and at the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left sides, and it stays in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a wooden board according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And moreover, Cove, you do this in a fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider in some days the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those occurs, then oppose yourself to it so that Cove enters into it until it is healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not suffer from complete fracture; however, the bones of the foot sometimes suffer from certain fragmented fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer from fracture, and do not occur unless there is great violence in the midst of disposal.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot receive a fracture and those bones are elevated above themselves between them, then the patient places their own foot on the prepared earth thus as an ant.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and engage those until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place a plaster and stop below, and place beneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that on the foot in descending structure, since you have enveloped it with drapes and other causes of which it is worthy.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when it passes three or four days, then you will release the ligament, because you will find the bones engaged, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is thus as it is customary.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	Moreover, if some toes are broken, then restore those, and engage those thus as you do and recommend to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken toe tendons according to the length of the toe, and let it be bound with a little of its own part; and then place beneath the foot this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that in descending structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Moreover, if that which is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then place on each toe tendons of its own quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand on one of the plates of the table against the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes which have been said to you in other fractures of accidents, and pause to think about each accident so that it covers everything.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	About the fracture of the neck of the thigh bone and of the bone of the penis and of the wand of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the thigh bone is bruised, then make a sitting position on that wounded side, and incline it towards the division of the two a little, and hold it back there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And place the compress on the neck of the hip joint, and make it just like the neck of the same side; and place the thigh in a concave position, and elevate the back of the small one little by little, because all that is forgotten returns until it is within the division of the neck of the same side as expected and the bruised bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place poultices on the back of it, and when you want to urinate, remove the hip joint to facilitate and make urine flow, and return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and return to the first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do it thus for seven days or around that, because then it will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take an egg of owl and stretch it over the thigh of the patient with a tube of cane; and insert the entire bladder into the neck of the patient, and blow into the tube so that the bladder is inflated inside the neck, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be filled with hip joint and remain thus for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis or thigh of man or woman is bruised, then administer in the restoration and agitation of it, according to what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these proximate fractures, and few happen, mainly to the one who has some study and use of my free book; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the strict structure of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the wand of the man is bruised, take a poultice of duck's egg, and put the wand in it; and place a dressing over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and place it thus for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	About the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded by a blow.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one to whom a fracture occurs by a blow, and mainly if the bone is large, such as the bone of the hip or of the adjuster, or similar to that, which you understand and perform thus soon as the conditions of fleubotomy are suitable for you or testify thus as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the blow flows with blood, then it is necessary that you understand the retention of it in such a way that you dust over the wounded place, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers as facilitated and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not prepared and the equipment of it with your fingers as more, then you reduce it with your fingers as more according to this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight digits and its width is according to the quantity of the blow; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to the quantity that is indicated for this in the cure of all species of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it is rounded, and it is in a small groove so that it does not get doubled over itself during the operation hour.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it is of acute extremity where the margin is in the seven extremities; and it is the underneath of it with a gross tendon tending, and of its greatness within the partitions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of it be placed on the elevated extremity of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and let it be enclosed with some equipment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken bone is subtle, and do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to its entirety as we have recommended, then dissect that part which is covered by the skin of the incision, or it will be one of the serrations in some manner that it may be possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape away what remains of the bone of roughness and of small fragments.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and then you reduce the patient's atrocious pain with vehement leading, then you know that the bone does not return to its natural place; and therefore you make a great improvement on the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete, which you do to the bone, and then you submerge it in a viatic stipic oil, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the cerot plague or another cause in which there may be oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then you administer stelas at the time of the complete restoration of the bone, and thus you discover the uncovered plague in such a way that you incise the traumatized area with forceps and uses enveloping bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware that you take total caution not to strenghten the plague in the fracture, because motives of bad doctors do it in this way, and they make a mortal or corrupting influence on their patients' bodies, so it is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the bone structure is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear about those evil accidents which we have recommended, and atrocious pain in the area, then do not think that you pause over those astelas, but rather make an enveloping of hard draps in place of stelas and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when you have begun to treat the plague once or twice a day, which in itself will generate strength, then you remove from underneath the drap which you had placed over the affected area, and then administer calves, injecting those of our customary practice, which is that we medicate the plagues, thus as injecting tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague in any morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and think that the member should be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction is facilitated from there to the lower parts.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes more than three days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from there to the arm, then you know that here are signs of small ulcers because it begins to inquire about the plague in tents.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated and touch the member and make it hurt, therefore you should incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you touch the plague with zinc oxide or ochre, it is stimulations, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you think that you pause at one of those things which convenes to the cure of which there is a preceding narration in the same chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that which you think is the best sermon and you make present your speech: when bones are crushed, empyemas form over the member just like the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the large members, and that you do not assume attraction from it, nor its extraction because many bad doctors induce death; having thus until you purify, for strong is the case if you wait for 20 days or more. And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if there is not that one.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the cure of nodes that form in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Bad doctors form this node in the vicinity of healthy fracture, and they increase it more near the joints, and it is ornamented by the figure of the member; and strong is the prohibition of the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the node is recent and administer in those medicines that have stipated thus as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similarly to those; in such a way that you take some of those or all, and combine them with vi stipic, or album of huou, or vi agree, and pause it over the node in estopa, and constrict it well over it for good construction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the extrication not dissolve it for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the node is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decently, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the node is already converted into stone and strengthened, and it is necessary to provoke an ostentation with that coytadament, and then you separate it from the upper part of the member, and incise the superfluous and eminent, or scrape that with some rezoris until it is removed; and cure it until it is sanctified.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then returns to its subtle member, freely following its natural shape.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returns to its subtle member, freely, it is not done so except for several causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the loosening of the joint that does not follow its natural course; or because of superfluous structure of the ligaments that prohibits nourishment from reaching the member; or because of a multitude of superfluous embrocations; or because of excessive movement not in its proper time; or because of paucity of blood in the patient's body and for debilitation of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender, so that the blood may be multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put poultices and lotions on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then pause the application on the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the necessary nourishment, or continues the embrocation with warm water, until the nourishment is corrected and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of broken bones when they are restored improperly and prohibit the operation of their own that is natural.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When accidents happen to a member already restored with a tortuous and prominent bone and node, and it is because of the faulty formation of the member, it mainly impedes the member from its natural operation, then it does not occur that you receive the word of one who examines that member as being newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very reprehensible, inducing great fear in the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Many are recent contraction and node, then it occurs that they are embrocated with warm water in which they collect softening herbs, thus as they are fuels of high degree and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and it is done in the emplaster with mollifying emplastering thus as it was well done; or that it is taken with mucilage of root of high degree and is continued in gray of guala or in oil of cirami, and is emplastered in that; or that they are taken with fat figures and are treated in women's colons, and similar to those of the medicines that are named as consolidating remedies.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some wounds are dissolved in assiduous friction, which is in the most humid places, and movement of the member is administered at all times and in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Many are twisted and have gone downhill and are made strong and converted into stone and provoked necessity for cure with iron, then it occurs that the pus is removed from above and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and something superfluous of node of that meter is inserted in the bone with subtle incisions, and is administered facility in that which is solicited and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On sermon about dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is a displacement of one of the joints from their natural place, because it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is distorted, and brings about great pains and lesions to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and strong with what is done, making difficult the reduction of the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it does not occur that it is manipulated or stretched at the time of inflammation, because many vigorous movements bring about spasm and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Many times when this occurs, then it happens that you are led to the flattering of the patient, and then it is laid down until the inflammation subsides; and then the member is embrocated with warm water and oil, and then it is reduced with facility.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the whole member is cured with that of which the remembrance will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have now ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceding in fracture; from the part of the body above down to the part below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the cure of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if not straight; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and are softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are softened at the joint until the patient's saliva corrodes and cannot hold it nor close its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	Many times when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major arrangements it returns to itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	Many times when the dislocation is complete and entire, then it occurs that reduction of it should be administered quickly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister holds the patient's head, and inserts his fingers into one of their jaws in the region of the dislocation of the jawbone inside their mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers into both jaws simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands are beforehand positioned where they can hold; and he orders the patient to relax their jaws and release any tension from some quarter; and the doctor holds the jaw and presses it back into place until it returns to its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporative water with oil, so that it helps to ease the reduction of both and does not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned and in their place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then pause on those pillows of drape with cerote, and make it smooth with wax and oil rosat; and thus it will be easier to facilitate the limbs' movements.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head steady between two pillows, so that they do not incline to the right or left side; and do not force them into any position; having eaten a light meal, forbid them to eat for a while, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are numb, then let them eat what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this is administered to facilitate, and do not bother about the perception of the mouth unless eating and drinking and ocitation, until the jaw is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not converted to their proper places, then apply heated cups and soda ashes, and strongly rub the patient's belly, and strongly induce vomiting with pure coleric medicine.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is pernicious; and apply heated cups more to the one to whom it happens in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The ankle is not dislocated from its joint inside the foot through its continuity; and sometimes it is dislocated to the front part beforehand, and that is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is when the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it returns to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then pause on that plaster and pillows and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of one who has a hernia and its continuation with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and put in place according to what we have said and according to your apparatus.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on that plaster, and pillows, and extraction, and order the patient to hold tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated to the upper part towards the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated to the upper part of the muscle, and that is done with tension; and it is not dislocated to the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated to the front parts through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And especially it is dislocated and beforehand exits to the lower parts because of the titillic, and especially in those in which the flesh is sparse, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there are many flesh, it is exited with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And strongly strike some men with percussion or cauterization, and the patient's muscle is affected by a cautious abscess, and it is cured because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you proceed with this until you are certain of its condition, and then you will proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is recognized the dislocation of it when it is in the lower parts because of the titillic; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, since you find among them a manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the titillic from the touch of the head of the muscle, just like a void, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the golden shoulder, nor can they move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the foot or above, and then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises their hand to the upper parts; and then stops the tied poultices under the titillation of it, and raises the joint strongly in its own place, and the minister raises their hand, and extends it there; and then stops it there so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Perhaps because of what we have said does not return, and so from the beginning it is necessary to accelerate the dislocation, for several days, then it happens that the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered an embrocation that softens and relaxes, thus if it cools quickly, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and stopped under the titillation of it, waiting for a hand to be inserted between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor stops the heel of the foot on the sphere, and raises the head of the muscle in a vertebra, and touches the hand of the patient so that it is not bruised at the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not bruised at the parts below, because then it will return to its own place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it according to this method: and it is that you should present yourself in front of a man whose length is longer than the patient's, and he is on the side of that bed, and insert your muscle below the titillation of the patient and raise the titillation of it to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower parts of the back.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Perhaps the patient is lighter, then it happens that I have another cause that is suspended, so that gravity affects it, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this way according to another method: and it is that a long stick with a rounded figurehead, like a pile driver, which is not large nor subtle, should be fixed into the ground; then you stop it on top of the patient's foot, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and then their hand is extended to the lower parts of the other side; and their body is extended from the other part strongly, because the joint returns to its own place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of a quantity whose length is two arms, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted on the surface of the titillation according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place the rounded head on top, tied with linen threads so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then stop it under the titillation of the patient, and their hand or arm is extended over the stick to the lower parts, and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then stop the arm on a scale of stairs according to the width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever method is possible for you, and then it happens that you stop under the titillation sphere of a hand's quantity; and then you prepare an emplaster made from powder of moly and album of egg whites over all the muscle, thus it is revolved above, and then you strengthen below the titillation with decent stricture; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the hand of it is annexed to its neck, and it should be left, and not be bruised for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it happens that the patient's food should be stopped little by little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring about their health.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more abundantly, around seven or eight, and an exercise of movement should be done; and so if it is stopped and not softened, then it will be healthy.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	Perhaps the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it happens that there should be administered a cautery with three tractions, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament and joint are not stopped, and the emplaster and stricture are reduced over several times, and it is not stopped and you cannot elevate that arm to the upper parts, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either inscribed or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will not be fixed in its own place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation of that which is done from the foot and knee or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another stricture should be administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the disease settles into the limb with gravity and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses many exhausted remedies within so that the gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in the part in front of the part behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you, because it is evident from the misalignment or maladjustment according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, it is clearly declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to treat the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches a chronic state, because if it reaches a chronic state, difficult is the reduction of it, and hardly can it be fully healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many exhausted remedies are used against that, which leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that its hand should be extended in two directions, and its arm should be expanded, and the muscles of the thigh are placed over the hip and below it, and the poultice envelops the joint with the tips of its own hands, or at the base of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that it bends its hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the base of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a vigorous extension and very strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is necessary for two ministers to extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then return the arm to its whole part, because it is enveloped by a doubled cloth wrapped long over its hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the thigh touches the joint with its hand, until it has some oil for so that it is those causes that help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then envelop the joint with a strong poultice until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it is necessary to be placed on that plaster in which it is stipulated and exception made in album of Houour, and it is extended in a strict descending structure, and the arm is suspended from the pillar, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is dislocated; and so if the joint is formed in its own place, then you loosen the bandage of it and leave it thus.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it thus for some days until it is fully strengthened; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens that the gravity falls on the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint alleviated, so it is anointed with a thick ointment; and then it is bound, and leave it thus on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put it in bath; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over that alleviated, so it is rounded by motion, once, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the instrument of bath, until it is cleaned.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, pause over that moist and scaled wound with border and stretch over that; and do some remedies, because it is moist and reduces to its own disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The shoulder of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and on the contrary it is of other joints, but especially it is necessary that there be velocity in the reduction of it at the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place becomes chronic or falls into a chronic state.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of that, and the thigh places its hand or its palm over the vicinity of the joint, and envelops it until it returns to its own place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But especially it is necessary that it be considered if the palm has been placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that minister is precisely over the table, so that the hand of the thigh falls upon that vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	Therefore, if you return immediately, it is good; and if not, then the abscess will become worse, and it will be difficult to cure; and do not delay, because if you do not, you will not suffer nor have relief from the reduction of the pus that passes in a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Perhaps the Roman Emperor's joint is twisted according to its crookedness; and do not notice any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot hold any cause; then you know that the nerves are pinched or crushed, and then it is not born in them unless they are strengthened with a pointed cautery for the correction of their case and fortifying their confidence.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the illness is returned, then stop on the abscess which we have recommended, and it will be laid down and strengthened for five days; and then it will be dislocated and laid down, and the patient's hand will be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Perhaps if the movement of it is stopped and accidently falls into some gravity, then there will be a flow of water and friction of certain evacuated things, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Certain evacuated things dislocate the toes completely apart.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a toe among those is dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then hold the toe and push back the dislocation with the tied fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it in a way that the part which is dislocated is released, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out in that same week.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to dislocate it during the day and exercise its movement, and lay it at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and lay it in that same part and do the first operation again, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When it happens to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then there is no cure, because death will come to the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is said that the evacuation of the patient's effort is outside their will, and cannot retain it; and many evacuated things are softened in certain members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebrae is removed from its place, because many evacuated things are removed and many evacuated things make the removal of those into four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that has been removed to the back parts and is named paralysis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Perhaps the cure of it is that then you consider if the paralysis occurs from weakness, because then there is no cure nor complete healing of that.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Perhaps in that which is seen by chance or by percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients discovered the ways of cure with verbose sermons, from which I will return to profit; perhaps you have already been freed from that from which I have little excuse for the trouble of it, by my own proximity to the intent of my own exposition, in which I have expounded and formed diverse instruments of that which I will show you and expand upon.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in paralysis which occurs from the front of the feet, there is no healing nor cure of that; and similarly in that which is done to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those there is no cure except for that which occurs on the back properly, as I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be extended on their face above a soft bed prop against the wall, and should be extended below with a moderate pillow so that the feet of it are not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight beam should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed around the head of it, and another beam in the air above the feet of it on the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the beam, and is not fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and below the thin linen band firmly; and extend the end of the linen to the beam which is above the head of it, and lay that on it; and then strengthen the other band around the thighs of it at the knees, and its legs; and then adjust all the bands and lay them on the other beam which is above the feet of it.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should carefully extend the band to the part of the beam, and do not remove the two beams and the bands from their places in which they are fixed, perhaps because it is not firmly held as I have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor stops his hands on the spine for strength to return, or he stops on that one table, and then adjusts on the table his six feet to return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Perhaps it does not return in this way, then take a table on which the width or length is in the air of three handbreadths, and hollow out the wall of which we have said is proper for the patient a place where the extremity of the table enters.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then stop the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor stops his six feet on the other extremity, and stretches well until the spine is straightened and returns to its own place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, uncover what has been turned around in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground the head of the patient in the back of two wooden posts, the length of which is one arm, and from the head to the back of two wooden posts; and let the length be between each post a palm, and already it is done in each post a hole where the corpse turns, and each one is firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round post in which it turns, and let it be turned around the two holes of the two wooden posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of it there is a hole in which the post is formed, the length of which is one palm in water where it turns; and in the two other wooden posts it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then stretch the ligaments that have been stretched on the chest of the patient in the hole where it is beneath the head of him, and the ligaments that have been stretched on his thighs in the turning post where it is beneath his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then there is someone who turns the post and stands as a minister who holds the post with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the post:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then since the spine is returned, and the place is straightened, then cover that you stop applying excruciating plaster in album of egg white, and then stop; and then stop on the plaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as takes up the space of the gibbosity, and on the part of the spine above.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be relaxed in the ligament which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nutrient until he is healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if some impediment remains in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that medicines which mollify and linseed are administered on the table for long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a thin layer of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some vegetables accidents occur in the back of the two spines, and it is judged for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already warns you so that you do not cover that it is done with a prognosis to him at this medicine, because very far from making you accede death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not deviate except for dislocation only, and they do not accede to those which accede to the other small joints with motion and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and little to the front parts or to the back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation of it to the inner parts is this, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is then longer and the denudation is more evident than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the ground, and it is the place where the ligament is apostematized by apostema caut, so that the head of the thigh has already been perverted here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the outer parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that it expands the leg in a complement, but however it does not bend because of the pain that is in the denudation, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot walk on that to the front parts; and its urine is retained and its ligament is apostematized, and from there the ambulation of it is above the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the back parts is that it does not expand the denudation, nor can it bend the ligament that bends the knee, and the leg of it is shorter than the other, and the ligament is mollified, and the head of the thigh is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Perhaps reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been antiquated with what you have administered reduction of it and according to its disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore it does not cover that it has been made a prognosis.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that case where the dislocation is recent, it is one of the four species of dislocations, then you should strive to reduce it to its natural position and extend it to the anterior and posterior parts, and move it to the right and left sides, because a strong return is not indicative of another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the patient from behind, or hold their hands, or bind what is placed on the leg beneath the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one below so that they hold the patient's hands beneath the thigh; and you should strengthen the bond around the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to extend the extremity of the joint.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension of it or from the anterior to the angle at the part of the elbow, or from the posterior to the part of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those in a way that the patient is elevated with their seat off the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that require their own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of it itself, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the anterior parts, you should resupinate the patient on their back; and then pause with the bonds around the joint of the thigh at that place where the head of the thigh and the space beneath the elbow meet; and then extend the bond from the part of the elbow to the further posterior part of the back.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes hold of the arms of it, and grasps the large space of the patient's thigh and extends to the anterior parts for vigorous extension, because that returns to its natural place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of lighter cure in which this member is reduced more easily than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused regarding you and does not obey the entrance in this species of cure altogether, then you should tie both feet of the patient strongly, lightly, over both heels and both knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And it is the length of each one by the quantity of four fingers, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient is suspended over the head of the bed, and it should be in a massage; and it is the length of it from the ground by the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh, and it is suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh in strong empirical force, because the joint returns to its natural place with velocity.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the anterior part, you should make the patient sit on a low seat as we have recommended in the previous chapter; and strengthen the bond around the patient's leg properly and around their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two stools are placed, one at the patient's feet, and the other at the head; and then two adjusted stools are placed beside the middle of the bed, on which drapes are enveloping, so that the patient is not damaged by the stool being between their thighs, so that the extension to the posterior parts is not disturbed.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with their hand guides the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if it obeys to reversal, it will be good greatly; and if not, pause over that diligently and thus as we have said in the previous chapter for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But you should make the patient sit on their back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then you should make the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on bed; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's elbow, and then bends that with the other hand, and in that bending pause, extend to the posterior part at the back of the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then you should not make the patient be extended to the posterior part, and it is elevated from the ground; but you should make it pause on a hard surface, thus as you make the examination if the ankle of it is dislocated to the anterior part, according to what we have said about the examination of it on two anchors; and it is on their face and the bonds are extended, according to what we have said, there is no failure.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And you should make an administrative compression on the table above the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is completed according to what you should do — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those bonds and the patient's leg is strengthened and expands, then you know that the member has returned as it should be — and then you adjust both thighs and pause with a bandage and strengthen with a splint thus that the ankle is not hidden in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then release the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those signs in the examination, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore leave the patient to rest afterwards.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster it, and stretch it according to its first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, and make it walk on crutches over several days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder joint is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated forward, and backward, and downward more than upward; and sometimes it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of it is that it commands the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the shoulder joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is to make the patient straighten up, and if possible, extend their leg, placing their foot on the ground; then attach the two [pieces of] cloth to the face of it, and place their foot between them; and then make the shoulder joint return to its place with the help of your palms, holding them between the pieces of cloth above the shoulder joint with force, and another servant extends their foot until the shoulder joint returns to its position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that its leg adheres to the thigh without labor or effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then plaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for several days, until they are healthy and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments which are involved in the cure of the aforementioned injury.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some ankle joints are removed by small movement, and some joints are dislocated according to their completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either backward or forward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle becomes swollen preceding the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of its movement is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facility and ease until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient straighten up, and hold that with a strong and valiant servant behind the two pieces of cloth on the middle place of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you put your right hand straightening the foot on the upper part, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the place of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two inches, and then extend it with your left hand; and place the toes of the foot in a straight line from the leg.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that for two inches according to what we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then place the toes of the foot on the leg at the third inch, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if it returns to one inch or two according to this method, and if the foot becomes swollen, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction of it is prohibited with what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on their two feet on the ground, and stretch a pillow strongly on the ground, and place it between their thighs, and you have enveloped it with a cloth so that the patient does not move.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the servant of it holds its thighs, and then another servant extends the foot with their hands or with a ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and then extend that servant against extension of the foot, and the pillow is extended between the thighs of the patient retaining it, so that the body of it is not pulled towards the lower parts from its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns with facility.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause and plaster strongly, and bind the foot with a strong ligament to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware that you do not touch or guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament on it is not violent and holds it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And you remove that from the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from strenuous activity for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Perhaps it is forgotten to administer that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not above it dissolved and corrupted, and then do not receive a cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter a hot aposteme, then take care that you administer in the cooling of the water in which our narration precedes, in another place of cure and of wrapping, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the Cure of Dislocation of the Toes of the Feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that one who is dislocated be placed in a little extension of their trouble; and this is not difficult, because it is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	Perhaps the dislocation is in some nodes of the toe of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit on the edge of a chair or on a table, and it should be standing thus as if it were a nave.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and stop the toe from going beyond what is imagined of the joints, and then calcify that which has gone to the toe until it returns, and see that it is already placed and does not appear in the eminent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then stop putting the belly of the foot on a table that holds the whole foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen that which is in structured decent firmness for three days; and then remove that and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the Species of Dislocation that are Caused by a Blow or a Fracture or any other Violent Means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter some cause of those, and you persevere in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many successful outcomes will follow, far from death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that it is not necessary to presume about the cure of the presument, but rather one who is skilled in the art, from long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that calm apostemes so much alone, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, not to the one to whom you hope for salvation, but rather from alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then it is necessary to hasten so much to remove the cause at the beginning, because meanwhile an hot aposteme develops.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns according to what we want, then administer a regimen that calms the hot aposteme and cures the wound with what is convenient for it among the dry desiccative remedies.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and you encounter separated bones, then you make the statement of theirs, and do in that what we have said about simple maladies of that which is preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid according to your prudence that which is intrumental in the ways of fear, according to what has been preceded in my predication; because it is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your cosmos as they are in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the paragraphs of Albucasim, perfectly full of those which God may bless.
Amen.	Amen.
